Indian Farming
January 2018 27
Rice-based cropping systems
for enhancing productivity of food grains in India:
decadal experience of AICRP
Mangal Deep1, R. Mahender Kumar2, Soumya Saha3
and Aarti Singh4
Indian Institute of Rice Research, Rajendranagar, Hyderabad (Telengana) 500 030
While most rice is grown in the kharif  (wet-season, roughly July-December), rice is also grown in
the rabi (dry-season, roughly January-June) in many states of India. Approximately 55% of
India's rice crop is irrigated, up from about 45% in 1990; the fraction of rice area that is
irrigated varies by state from <50% irrigated in Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Bihar , to
>90% in Punjab, T amil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, and Haryana.  Existing All India
Coordinated Rice Improvement Project at Indian Institute of Rice Research, Hyderabad provides
sufficient information on the decadal changes in the cropping systems research, further to quantify
and reach a future novel research strategy to enhance productivity of rice based cropping systems.
Key words: Cropping systems, Foodgrains, Productivity , Rice
Indian Farming 68(01): 27–30; January 2018
R
ICE-based cropping system
can be described as mix of
farming practices that comprises of
rice as the major crop followed by
subsequent cultivation of other crops.
Intercropping of rice and other
compatible crops is also widely
practised in many regions. Rice-based
cropping system is a major cropping
system practised in India, which
include the rotation of crops
involving cereals, pulses, oilseeds,
cotton, sugarcane, green manures,
vegetable, etc. V arious rice-based
cropping systems have been reported
from different parts of India ranging
from rice-rice-rice to rice followed by
different cereals, pulses, oilseeds,
vegetables and fibre crops. Rice-
based cropping systems may include
lowland and upland crops. So far,
most people have been focusing on
individual crops disregarding the fact
that each crop is only a component of
a cropping system. In rice growing
areas, several crop combinations
(cropping systems) are in practice
based on agro-ecological conditions,
market and domestic needs and
facilities available with farmers. Some
of the most prominent ones are being
discussed.
Mixed varietal cropping of rice :
System of mixing seed of early rice
with late maturing deep water rice is
being practices in West Bengal to
avoid total crop loss at the event of
flood. The seed of both the types of
mixed in 1:1 ratio and has given
higher yield than sole cropping of
either type. Similarly , growing of a
mixture of autumn and winter
varieties in 3:1 ratio in T amil Nadu
and Kerala is frequently in practice.
However, under normal conditions,
it has created problems in performing
agricultural operations like
harvesting, deciding fertilizer doses
etc. 
Intercropping rice with other crops: It
is a common practice under upland
conditions in north and north-eastern
part of the country to grow rice
intercropped with blackgram,
greengram, sesame, maize, finger
millet or other minor millets. The
ratio of rice and intercrop is preferred
to be 3-4:1.
Relay/paira/utera cropping: The
seed of succeeding crops like lentil,
gram, pea, lathyrus, berseem, linseed
etc. is sown broadcast in maturing
rice crop. This practice saves time;
money (to be spent on land
preparation etc.) and utilizes residual
fertility . This practice is common in
both upland and lowland rice culture.
Sequential cropping in rice:
Sequential cropping refers to the
crops grown as preceding or
succeeding with rice as shown below.
Rice-based cropping systems research
under AICRIP in last decade
Rice-cereal based cropping system:
Rice, maize, and wheat are major
cereals contributing to food security
and income in South Asia. These
crops are grown either as a
monoculture or in rotations in
tropical and sub-tropical
environments of South Asia. In the
irrigated and favourable rainfed
lowland areas, rice-rice (R-R), rice-
Indian Farming
January 201828
wheat (R-W), and rice-maize (R-M)
are the predominant cropping
systems Table 1. Rice-rice is common
in tropical climate with distinct dry
and wet seasons such as in South
India, and in sub-tropical areas with
mild cool winter climate such as in
Bangladesh, Eastern India, and
Eastern Nepal. The rice-wheat system
of India are important for food
security of the country , and for the
livelihoods of the many millions of
farming families and others employed
in aspects of the value chain. Most of
the R-W area is located on the Indo-
Gangetic Plains (IGP), with 10 Mha
in India, 2 Mha in Pakistan, 0.5 Mha
each in Nepal and Bangladesh. The
two small north-west Indian states of
Punjab and Haryana, located mostly
in the Indus basin, provide about half
the rice and 85% of the wheat
procured by the Indian government.
Multi-locational trials on rice-wheat
systems under AICRIP showed that
transplanting method was found to
be superior over direct seeded
method and application of organics
+ farmyard manure and micro-
nutrients enhanced system
productivity at most of the locations.
R-M systems exist in all climate
ranging from tropical to sub-tropical
to warm temperates.  Rice-maize
systems, however, are less extensive as
compared to R-W or R-R, if total
area under these cereal systems is
considered. Higher productivity with
sustainability remains the major
concern of any crop planning. Any
system which requires less input and
contributes more is considered to be
the efficient. In recent years, oilseeds
and legumes are receiving more
attention owing to limited
production and higher prices.
Inclusion of these crops in the
sequence changes the economics of
the cropping system. There is a closer
relationship between cropping system
productivity , economics, energy and
environment. Different rice-based
crop rotations were evaluated at 13
locations to economize the nutrient
recommendation, enhancing nutrient
use efficiency , soil-health and sustain
productivity . The result showed that
rice-maize rotation (T able 2)
produced the highest rice equivalent
yield (10.2 tonne/ha) and gross
monetary returns (` 59,110/ha).
worthwhile to mention that although
organic manures ameliorate the
physical, chemical and biological
properties of the soils, they cannot
substitute chemical fertilizers because
of the low amount of plant nutrients
present in them and because their
bulky nature involves high transport
cost. Thus, we can not wholly and
solely depend upon manures for
increasing the yield of the rice–wheat
cropping system. The main bio-
fertilizers which can be used as
supplement to chemical fertilizers are
blue-green algae and Azolla for rice.
Blue-green algae are capable of fixing
atmospheric nitrogen, particularly
under puddled rice soils, contributing
about 50–100 kg N/ha. They also
produce growth-promoting
substances. In simple terms,
Integrated Nutrient Management
system refers to a balanced use of
chemical fertilizers in combination
with organic manures, crop residues,
bio-fertilizers and other biological
sources. Multi-locational trials
conducted at different parts of the
country revealed that rice-based
cropping systems performed better
under green manure and farmyard
manure applied plots  than those of
without organic manure applied
plots. Similarly , nutrient management
in different seasons also plays an
important role in productivity of a
system (Table 3).
Micronutrient plays a major role in
enhancing the productivity of any
cropping system. The experiment
revealed that addition of micro-
nutrients substantially improved rice
grain yields in sandy loam soils of
Kanpur and addition of organic
matter during previous kharif  had
positive residual effect in succeeding
wheat crop productivity and recorded
additional higher grain yield either
with soil or spray application of
micro-nutrients.
Conservation agriculture: V arious
forms of conservation agriculture are
now being practised in over 157
million ha globally but mostly in
large mechanized farms in rainfed
and supplementary irrigation areas.
There is much less application of
conservation agriculture in rice-based
systems which support
predominantly smallholder farms.
Table 1. Rice-based cropping system under (AICRIP)
Irrigated conditions Upland condition Rice under integrated farming system
Rice-Rice-Rice Rice-Chickpea Rice-Fish-Poultry
Rice-Rice-Cereal Rice-Lentil Rice-Fish-Duckery
Rice-Rice-Pulses Rice-Mustard/Linseed
Rice-Wheat-Pulse Rice-Barley
Rice-Toria-Wheat Rice-Wheat
Rice-Wheat Rice-Pea
Rice-Mustard
Table 2. System productivity and gross
return of different rice based
cropping system
Cropping REY Gross return
systems (tonne/ha) ( `/ha)
Rice-rice 7.8 45,124
Rice-wheat 8.4 48,882
Rice-maize 10.2 59,110
Rice-pulse 8.5 49,152
Rice-oilseed 7.0 40,472
REY, Rice equivalent yield
Nutrient management strategy for
rice-based cropping system:  In
developing countries such as India,
the most important challenge is to
provide sufficient food for the
growing population at affordable
prices from inelastic land areas. The
application of agro-chemicals resulted
in a many-fold increase in agriculture
production but at the cost of soil
health. For the present level of
production, the estimated nitrogen–
phosphorus–potassium removal is
about 28 metric tonne, resulting in a
negative balance of about 10 metric
tonnes. To fulfill such a negative
balance of fertilizers, there is an
urgent need to identify suitable
integrated plant nutrient systems for
different crops and cropping systems.
Rice–wheat cropping system is an
important cropping system of
northern India. In rice–wheat
cropping systems, green manuring
has proved a feasible and reliable
practice to improve the productivity
and soil fertility as well. It is
Indian Farming
January 2018 29
Conventional tilled rice-rice system
produced the highest system
productivity compared to other
tillage management practices (Table
4). Similarly , rice-linseed system also
produced the highest system
productivity than other tillage
management practices. It is
concluded that reduced tillage
negatively affected the rice-based
cropping system than conventional
tillage practices.
Climate resilient management practices
Indian agriculture faces the dual
challenge of feeding more than a
billion people in a changing climatic
and economic scenario.  Agriculture
is the main source of livelihood for
almost 60% of the country’s total
population.  The impacts of climate
change on agriculture will be severely
felt in India.  It has been projected
that under the scenario of a 2.5
0C to
4.90C temperature rise, rice yields
will drop by 32-40% and wheat
yields by 41 to 52%.  As Indian
agriculture is highly dependent on
specific climatic conditions, the
research on the impact of climate
change on agriculture in general and
rice production in specific is a high
priority in India.  There is an urgent
need to focus on climate resilient
input management practices for
improving use efficiency and
sustaining the rice and rice-based
cropping systems across the country .
To address the issues of sustainability
of food production on account of
changing climate, a combination of
water and nutrient management
practices were tested aimed at water
and nitrogen saving in rice and
rice-based cropping system. For this
purpose, an experiment was done
during kharif 2013. The study
indicated that non-puddled rice crop
establishment is promising at
Coimbatore and at other locations
and  it can be made as productive as
transplanted rice with resorting to
split application of N, use of
biofertilizers to substitute 50% N
and crop residue retention at most of
the locations. Further, non-puddled
rice didn’t influence the grain yields
of rabi crops except at Coimbatore.
Climate resilient management
practices (Split application of
fertilizer + biofertilizer + crop
residue retention) are more
promising than conventional
practices (Fig. 1).
FUTURE STRATEGY
1. Intensify crops in rice-based
production systems by increasing
the number of crops grown on the
same land each year following the
main rice crop. Crop intensi-
fication may be achieved by using
shorter season varieties, improving
on-farm water and soil fertility
management (e.g. water-
harvesting practices, minimum
tillage, supplementary irrigation),
and introducing rotation crops.
2. Boost yields by improving the
efficiency of water and nutrient
use. The entry point for yield
enhancement is to improve the
crop water-use efficiency of both
irrigated and dryland components
of rice-based systems. Water
productivity gains will need to be
underpinned by sustainable soil
fertility . This will necessitate
targeted research to develop site-
specific nutrient management
systems, including more efficient
use of fertilizers, soil ameliorants,
green and animal manures, and
residues. T ailoring agronomic
practices (e.g. weed management,
planting methods) to local
conditions will further enhance
water and nutrient efficiency .
3. Improve livestock production by
integrating animals more
effectively with rice-based
cropping systems. Livestock
production is highly dependent
upon feed sourced from crops –
grains and tubers, stover, green
forage, and processing by-
products – together with weeds
within and beside crops. The
transformation of poor farmers
from livestock keepers to active
market-oriented producers will
require improvements in livestock
reproduction and nutrition
coupled with better access to
markets.
4. Strengthen policy settings by
improving understanding of the
linkages with, and impacts on,
food security . Food security is
affected by the mix of policy
settings at local to international
scales. Achieving more productive
and sustainable rice-based
cropping systems will necessitate
better understanding of and
Table 3. Productivity of rice-based cropping system under seasonal nutrient management
Treatments Rice-rice Rice-wheat Rice-maize Rice-pulse Rice-oilseed
Control 8.54 4.67 7.3 5.56 5.53
50% RFD (K) 7.20 6.10 9.12 7.84 6.80
100% RFD (K) 7.56 8.88 10.19 8.81 7.61
150% RFD (K) 7.78 9.27 10.47 9.26 8.19
50% RFD (K and R) 7.97 7.39 10.48 8.52 7.12
100% RFD (K and R) 8.74 11.14 11.80 9.68 8.65
150% RFD (K and R) 9.06 11.6 12.01 10.21 9.05
RFD
Table 4. Impacts of conservation agriculture on productivity of rice-based cropping systems
Treatments Rice-rice Rice-linseed
Conventional tillage with hybrid 13.15 10.0
Conventional tillage with high yield variety 12.54 9.08
Zero tillage with hybrid 8.96 7.74
Zero tillage with high-yield variety 8.19 7.15
Minimum tillage with hybrid 10.07 9.02
Minimum tillage with hybrid 9.50 8.19
Fig. 1. Climate resilient management practices
in rice-based cropping systems
Indian Farming
January 201830
are very diverse. These varied
cropping systems occur across a
varied environment (e.g. weather,
soils, topography), so quantitative
assessment of a number of the
‘outputs’ of agriculture (e.g., crop
yield, water use, soil erosion, nutrient
leaching, greenhouse gas emissions)
will benefit from detailed study of
cropping systems and environmental
variables.
1-3,4 Scientist, 2Principal Scientist,
corresponding auhor e mail:
Mangal.iari@gmial.com
productivity of rice-based
cropping system in India.
SUMMARY
Rice is a dominant crop; about
20% of global total human food
calories are supplied by rice. More
than 150 million ha  were sown with
rice in 2002, 90% of that in Asia.
Demand for rice in Asia is projected
to increase by 70% over the next 30
years. At ~45 million ha, India has
the largest national area of rice
cropping . Much of this rice area is
multi-cropped, and cropping patterns
integration across formal and
informal policies, especially in the
arenas of agricultural industry and
trade, land and water resources
management, agricultural
extension systems, and marketing
systems for rice and related
products.
5. Build capacity of individuals and
institutions by establishing
effective collaborative
relationships and facilitating
knowledge sharing. Effective and
lasting results for food security
will depend upon developing
strong in country capacity for
framing, conducting and
extending R&D. This capacity
extends from individual
researchers to the broader
institutional arrangements. The
principal mechanism for capacity
building is through partnering of
agricultural research institutions,
universities, Krishi Vigyan
Kendras, state agriculture
departments and all other
agriculture related functionaries in
country to jointly deliver a model
for sustainable enhancement of
Indian Farming
Article Certificate
I.D. No:
Article entitled:  ……………………………………………………………………………………………………….
It is certified that:
1. The articles has been seen by all the authors (signature given below), who are satisfied with its form and contents.
2. Due credit of authorship has been given to every scientist who has notable contribution to the paper, and we are
satisfied with the sequence in which the author’s names appear in the by-line (author’s name).
3. The by-line of the article does not include any name of a scientist who has not made a notable contribution to the
paper.
4. The address of the institute appearing below the by line is that of the institute where the research was conducted
and not that of the institute where the first author (for the author who has sent the paper) is currently employed.
5. The results reported in the article have not been simultaneously sent for publication in any other journal.
6. The article has not been rejected for publication in any other journal.
7. If published the copyright of this article would vest in the INDIAN COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL
RESEACRH, which has the right to enter into any agreement with any organization in India or abroad engaged in
reprography , photocopy , storage and dissemination of information contained in it, and neither we nor our legal
heirs will have any claims on any royalty .
Signature Name in Full and designation, Present official address Subscription with
Address date number
OPTIONAL
The above certificate is correct to the best of my knowledge and I have no objection to the publication of the article
cited above in Indian Farming.
Signature and address of Head
of the department/head of the institute
Disclaimer
• All disputes are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of competent courts and forums in
Delhi/New Delhi only.
• The Council does not assume any responsibility for opinions offered by the authors in
the articles and no material in any form can be reproduced without permission of the
Council.
• The Council is not responsible for any delay, whatsoever, in publication/delivery of the
periodicals to the subscribers due to unforeseen circumstances or postal delay.
• Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money,
incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement
appearing in this publication.
• The Council does not vouch for any claims made by the authors, advertisers of products
and service.
• The publisher and the editor of the publication shall not be held liable for any
consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.
Indian Farming
