 
 
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES (SOP) 
for 
INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT (IPM) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version: 01; June, 2014
Dr. S. N. Sushil 
Plant Protection Advisor 
Dte. of PPQ&S, Faridabad 
  
 
 
June 5, 2014   
Ram Asre 
Addl. PPA (IPM)       
Dte. of PPQ&S, Faridabad 
 
 
 
 
  
List of Contributors 
Technical guidance and Supervision: Dr. S. N. Sushil, Plant Protection Adviser  
& 
                                 Ram Asre, Addl. Plant Protection Adviser (IPM) 
Sl. 
No. Chapter Contributors 
1.  
Standardization of FFS 
Curriculum, HRD; 
Orientation Training (2 
days), Refresher Training 
(5 days) and SLTP (long 
duration) 
(1) Dr. V.K. Srivastava, JD (PP), HQ, Faridabad; Group Leader  
(2)  Dr. Jasveer Singh, DD (E), HQ, Faridabad 
(3)  Sh. R. Murali, DD (E), HQ, Faridabad 
(4)  Dr. G.P. Singh, AD (E), CIPMC, Gorakhpur 
(5)  Sh. Yogesh Kunwar, PPO (WS), HQ, Faridabad 
2.  
Conservation & 
Augmentation of  Bio-
control agents 
(1)  Sh. Ram Asre, APPA (IPM), HQ, Faridabad 
(2) Dr. C. S. Patni, PPO (PP), CIPMC, Faridabad 
3.  Pests Surveillance & 
Monitoring 
(1) Dr. K.S. Kapoor, DD (E); Co-ordinator, HQ, Faridabad 
(2) Sh. P.K. Ghosh, AD (E), CIPMC, Kolkata 
4.  Weed ecology and 
Management 
(1)  Dr. Shbhas Kumar, DD (WS), HQ, Faridabad 
(2) Sh. Arunabha Chakraborty, PPO (E), HQ, Faridabad 
(3) Sh. Yogesh Kunwar, PPO (WS), HQ, Faridabad 
5.  
Laboratory Manual for 
Mass Rearing of Bio-
control agents 
(1)    Dr. M. S. Akhtar, AD (E), CIPMC, Faridabad Member Secretary 
 (2)  Dr. Umesh Kumar, PPO (PP), CIPMC, Lucknow 
(3)  Dr. Navendu Nair, PPO (E), CIPMC, Agartala 
6.  Compiled by (1)  Dr. M. S. Akhtar, AD (E), CIPMC, Faridabad Member Secretary 
7.  Design & Layout (1) Sh. Arunabha Chakraborty, PPO (E), HQ, Faridabad 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
 Foreword  
 Preface  
 List of Contributors   
Sl. No. CHAPTER PAGE NO. 
1. HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
i. Standardization of FFS Curriculum  
ii. Orientation Training Programme 
iii. Season Long Training Programme 
1-41 
01 
08 
09 
2. CONSERVATION & AUGMENTATION OF  BIO-CONTROL AGENTS 
i. Introduction 
ii. Programmes to be implemented 
iii. Tools for conservation & augmentation of bio-control agents 
iv. Items required for conservation & augmentation kit 
v. Some pests and their common natural Enemies 
vi. Ways and Means of Conservation of Natural Enemies 
vii. Conserve & Augment following Bio-agents 
viii. List of Bio-control agents of different crops 
ix. Natural enemies of crop pests in India 
x. Ecological Engineering 
xi. Recognize natural enemies 
xii. Cultural practices that affect natural enemies 
xiii. Identify the natural enemies 
xiv. Augmentation of Natural enemies 
xv. Recommended dose of bio-control agents 
xvi. Biological agents used against different crop insect pests 
42-68 
42 
42 
42 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
57 
48 
50 
52 
52 
60 
61 
64 
3. PESTS SURVEILLANCE & MONITORING 
i. Surveillance 
ii. Agencies to be involved for surveillance 
iii. Aims & objectives of surveillance 
iv. Why to conduct pest surveillance 
v. Outcome of the surveillance action 
vi. Types of survey 
vii. Electronic-pest surveillance through hand held device 
viii. Pest surveillance and advisory system in india 
ix. Sampling 
69-83 
69 
69 
69 
70 
70 
71 
71 
72 
72 
x. Items required for survey & surveillance in the kit 
xi. Sampling methods 
xii. Disease assessment 
xiii. Sampling for nematodes 
xiv. Rodents survey 
xv. Estimation of weeds 
xvi. Identification of diseases, pests, weeds, natural enemies in different 
crops 
73 
74 
75 
76 
75 
77 
4. WEED ECOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT 
i. Introduction 
ii. Classification of Weeds 
iii. Weed Ecology 
iv. Survival Mechanisms of Weeds 
v. Weed competition 
vi. Principles of Weed Management 
vii. Integrated Weed Management (IWM) 
84-97 
84 
84 
90 
91 
92 
93 
93 
5. LABORATORY MANUAL 
i. Mass Production of Trichogramma sp. and Trichogrammatoidea sp. 
ii. Mass production of Bracon hebetor 
iii. Mass production of Goniozus nephantidis 
iv. Mass production of Chelonus blackburni 
v. Mass production of Trichoderma viridae 
vi. Mass production of Beauveria bassiana 
vii. Production of the nuclear polyhedrosis virus of Helicoverpa armigera 
viii. Mass production of Cryptolaemus montrouzieri Mulsant 
ix. Mass production of Chilocorus nigrita (Fabricious) 
x. Mass production of Scymnus coccivora Ayyar 
xi. Mass production of Anthocorid bugs 
xii. Mass production of Reduviid predators 
xiii. Mass production of Chrysopid predetor 
98-131 
98 
103 
104 
104 
105 
107 
109 
111 
114 
117 
120 
122 
126 
 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
1 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
1. FARMERS FIELD SCHOOL FOR 
INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT 
 
Farmers Field School (FFS): 
 Farmer Field Schools (FFS)  is an agricultural 
school of farmer which is conducted by the 
farmers on their own fields. This is research 
based learning through non formal 
education(NFE)  
 FFS provide opportunities for learning by 
doing. It teaches basic agricultural and pest 
management skills that make  the farmers  
experts and perfect on  their farms in decision 
makings. 
 FFS is a forum where farmers and facilitators 
debate on ob servations, shows experiences and 
present new information  to come to the 
conclusion 
 
Aims of FFS 
 Empowering farmers with knowledge and skills 
 Making farmers experts in their own fields. 
 Sharpening the farmers’ ability to make critical 
and informed decisions. 
 Sensitizing farmers in new ways of thinking 
and problem solving 
 Helping farmers learn ing how to organize 
themselves and their communities  to become 
sound socially and economically. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Essential elements of FFS: 
The group: 
 The group comprises of indiv iduals (30 
farmers) with common  interests, forming  the 
core of a Farmer Field School. The FFS tends 
to strengthen existing groups or may lead to the 
formation of new groups 
 
The Field: 
 The field is the school which has the facilities 
of training materials like plants, pests and 
natural enemies.  In most cases, the groups 
provide a study site with a shaded area for 
follow-up discussions. 
 
The Facilitator: 
 The facicilitator is a technically competent 
person who leads group members through the 
hands-on exercise  and facilitates  the activities 
to arrive on conclusion. 
 
FFS establishment 
 Selection of right village for establishing FFS 
and the selection of right kind of farmers as 
trainees will greatly contribute to the success of 
the FFS. Prior to starting of FFS a t least two 
visits are required. 
 
First visit 
 It is expected that the FFS facilitators will be 
establishing FFS in their own area of posting 
and hence they should be familiar with the 
villages profile  based on the information that 
may have already, select potential villages for 
visiting. 

CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
2 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
Criteria and steps for village selection:  
 All approachable location/villages should be 
selected 
 With m aximum pest problems should be 
selected 
 High pesticide usage and related problems to be 
preferred 
 Irrigation facilities should be preferred 
 Too close to city to be avoided 
 No IPM training conducted previously 
 Political sensitiveness should be avoided 
 Fairly easy access should be preferred 
 Comfortable rapport between facilitators and 
farmers. 
 Aware with the purpose of visit  by the village 
leader 
 Request him to invite all  cotton/rice/vegetable 
growers (depending upon the crop chosen) for 
general meeting 
 Collect village profile 
 Area under crop cultivation 
 Number of farmers 
 Pest problems in previous crops 
 Pesticide usage in previous crops 
 Information about irrigation facilities 
 Request the village head to organize meeting  in 
the following week. 
 Women farmers participation is also required 
 The date, time should be fixed in consultation 
with village leader 
 Social and economic status of the farmers 
 
To identify potential farmers site selection during 
second visit: 
 This visit should be one week prior to the first 
visit 
 Organize the general meeting as planned 
 Ensure participation from farmers, women 
farmers 
 Discuss the important probl ems related to crop 
management 
 Discuss about FFS structure 
 Outline of FFS 
 Nature of training 
 No provision of  honorarium for attending  the 
FFS 
 There will be refreshment in each session 
 The facilitator should announce the interested 
farmers to work as farmer facilitator  
 
 
Criteria and steps for farmer’s selection:  
 The farmers should be typical of  that area in 
terms of crop cultivation 
 Active farmers should be preferred 
 Should be energetic and physically fit 
 SC/ST / Women farmers should be given 
preference 
 Willing to learn at their own. 
 The village head will help in choosing right 
farmers. 
 Finalize the list of 30 farmers. 
 Request the selected farmers to attend the next 
meeting. 
 Conduct this meeting at least two week before 
commencement of FFS 
 Conduct signs and symptoms exercise 
 Conduct meeting with selected farmers 
 Hold participatory discussion to  identify local 
problems related to total crop management 
 Identify local needs  
 Explain FFS activities in detail 
 Discuss farmers practice 
 Ask the farmers for their own  practices to 
follow in farmers practice plot 
 Explain the farmers about IPM practices are to 
be followed in the IPM plot 
 With the consensus of the farmers, select  
suitable FFS field and training site 
 Finalize the inaugural day for FFS  and check 
out programme 
 
Criteria and steps for field selection: 
 Select minimum of 2 acres 
 The field should be belonging to one farmer 
 It should be easily accessible and should not be 
too far from FFS village 
 The filed should be close to the meeting place 
(gathering place) 
 Some shady areas should be nearer to the field 
 No water stagnation in the field 
 No abnormalities in the field 
 Identify farmer who is willing to give the land 
for conducting field experiments and AESA 
 He should agree to follow the schedule of 
farming operations as finalized by the farmers 
 He should agree to meet all the expenditure 
involved for  both the fields except the IPM 
inputs for pest management. 
 He should agree to allow the farmer participant 
to work in that field to organize field day. 
 At the planning m eeting through participatory 
discussion with all selected farmers the 
facilitators should make verbal contract with 
FFS farmers. 
 The FFS day of the week 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
3 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 The time to start FFS session 
 The duration of FFS sessions 
 Norms/regulations/rules for FFS 
 Grouping of participants 
 Assign the name to each group 
 Allow the participants to select the leader for 
their group 
 Finalize the responsibilities of group leaders 
 
Base line survey: 
The base line survey should be conducted in 
FFS and Non FFS villages. All the 30 farmer s and 
10 non FFS farmers from the neighboring village 
should be interviewed. The survey should be 
completed immediately after the selection of FFS 
village and farmers and prior to conducting 
planning meeting.  
 
Grouping of farmers: 
At the beginning of the FFS, the trainees will be 
grouped into five small groups  and the grouping 
will be maintained till the end of FFS.  Each group 
will be named by the beneficial insects after 
discussion with the participants. 
 
FFS gathering place:  
The FFS will have a gatherin g place, close to 
the FFS field, where the farmers will be able to 
assemble, make drawing of their field observations, 
discuss and make presentations 
 Close to the training field 
 Accessible to road 
 Provision for protection from sun and rain 
 Sufficient arran gement to accommodate to all 
participants  
 Select the site in concurrence with farmer 
participants. 
 
FFS Duration: 
The FFS should last for entire crop season. 
There will be a 14s essions during the period 
excluding FFS and field day. 
 
 
FFS session and duration: 
Each FFS session will last for 4 hours except 
for inaugural and field day. FFS shall run in the 
morning hours preferably. 
 
Norms and expectations: 
 The training norms should be set at the 
beginning of the FFS and clearly explained to 
the farmers. 
 All F FS farmers should be punctual in 
attending FFS sessions 
 The farmers should be committed and devoted 
to the work 
 Attendance will be maintained in every session 
 If any farmer remains absent for more than 25% 
of the FFS session , he  should not be given 
certificate. 
 No substitute should be allowed. 
 
Facilitators: 
 Should have good experience  in hand to  
conducting FFS 
 Should be punctual 
 Should give due respect to the ideas of the 
participants 
 Should be committed and devoted to the work 
 He can use inputs of the group 
 
Training methodologies: 
 Season long 
 Fully field oriented 
 Learning material is field and it is mainly based 
on learning group 
 Teaching science to farmers 
 FFS should have minimum lecture  and 
maximum interaction 
 The basis for training approach is Non- formal 
 Training curriculum is based on local needs 
 FFS is characterized by free and open 
communication 
 Working in small groups. 
 
Objectives and quality indicators: 
 Grow healthy crop  
 Conserve natural enemies 
 Observe field weekly  
 Protect environment 
 Make farmers expert in their own fields  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
FFS curriculum: 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
4 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 Based on local needs  and identified crop  a 
general curriculum will be developed by the 
facilitators, prior to starting of the first FFS 
session. While developing the curriculum, the 
training obje ctives and quality indicators will 
be taken into consideration. The curriculum so 
developed at the beginning of the FFS will 
serve the guidelines for carrying out FFS 
activities. However, it should be remembered 
that changes in the curriculum topic/schedule of 
activities can be made depending upon the 
prevailing situation but this has to be done in 
consultation with FFS participant farmers. 
 The training will focus on the four different 
areas as follows. 
 
FFS curriculum and time matrix. 
Item % of time  share of the 
activities and time 
matrix 
Science and farmers 50%, 2hrs 
Group dynamics and 
team building 
exercises 
30%, 1hrs 
Management aspects 10%, 30min 
Organization aspects  10%, 30min 
 
Science and farmers: 
 AESA of different practices and trials 
 Insect zoo 
 Relevant special topics 
 
Group dynamic s/Team building/I ce breakers  
exercises; Organization and Management:  
 Work plan 
 Development 
 Organizing field days 
 Organizing FFS materials 
 AESA follow up 
All FFS session will have the following common 
activities 
 Recapitulation of previous session activities 
 Attendance of participatory farmers 
 Presentation of day’s activities 
 Field visit for AESA 
 AESA drawing, analysis of observation, 
discussion and decision making by sub-groups 
 AESA presentation by group wise 
 Follow up of AESA/field action 
 Observation on experiments 
 Insect zoo set up and observation 
 Tea/ Refreshment break 
 Group dynamics 
 Special topics 
 Planning for next week 
 Review of days activities 
 
KEY CONCEPTS AND TECHNIQUES USED 
IN FFS 
Agro-Ecosystem Analysis: 
This entails both living and non -living things 
found in an agro ecosystem and the environment. 
The activity helps in identifying the functions of the 
organisms found in the ecosystem and how they 
interact among each other. 
 
 
Purposes of AESA: 
 Promote learning by discovery and learner with 
their own analysis. 
 Guide farmers to critically analyze and make 
better decision makers on their own fields. 
 
Why AESA? 
 It improves decision -making skills, through a 
field s ituation analysis by observing, all the 
biotic and abiotic drawing and discussion. 
 
 
 
 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
5 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
The following are to be noted while carrying out 
AESA: 
 
General Parameters 
 Group No. 
 Field No. 
 Date: 
 Week No. 
 General information 
 Crop & Variety 
 Date of planting./sowing 
 Stage of the crop 
 Spacing 
 Fertilizer 
 Weather 
 Time of observation 
 Plant population 
 Germination % 
 
Plant Parameters 
 Number of hills/Number of plants 
 Number of monopodiums/sympodia branches 
 No. of leaves 
 No. of diseased leaves 
 No. of dead leaves 
 Plant height 
 No. of pods 
 Treatment 
 Treatment schedule 
 Management practices 
 Plant drawing 
 Natural enemies 
 Observations 
 Soil moisture 
 Diseases 
 Insect pests 
 Rodent damage./live burrows 
 Plant health 
 Deficiency 
 Weeds 
 parasites 
 Predators 
 Recommendations 
 What management practices to be applied  on 
crop production and protection aspects 
 
Long term experiments and field studies: 
The following field trials as participatory action 
research (PAR) may be adopted depending on the 
local needs of the farmers. 
The learning cycle processes to be employed 
through facilitating scientific methods in choosing 
the problems for experimentation. All the 
experiments to be conducted with single variable 
factors only with three /four replications. Care to be 
taken to record observations properly and timely. 
The emphasis is to gain experience on ski ll 
experimentation so that the same can be repeated in 
future. The following long term experiments will 
enhance the decision making ability of the 
participants in terms of plant compensation ability 
like defoliation experiments, removal of fruiting 
bodies, detillering etc. 
 Management practice trials 
 Plant compensation studies 
 Fertilizer trials 
 Spacing trials 
 Varietal trials 
 Water management trials 
 Any other need based trials 
 While taking observations in these experiments 
more emphasis should be given on rec ord of 
pest and natural enemies 
 
Insect zoo studies: 
Insect zoo studies in FFS helps in creating 
curiosity and interest among the participants and 
farmers. It creates conductive atmosphere for 
learning science in the field. Simple studies as 
functional rol e of the organism in the ecosystem, 
damage symptoms feeding potential and preference 
of predators, parasitization studies. This can be 
done using simple equipments such as plastic vials, 
containers, Petri plates, plastic cups and field cages 
etc. 
 
Special topics: 
Special topics support the AESA analysis 
involving more deeply on specific issues relating to 
ecosystem and IPM principles. Special topics 
sharpen the skill of the participants. It also provides 
training on basic experimentation methods. Special 
topics should be  problem based  and as per local 
needs and should be conducted in fields where the 
problems exist. 
List of special topics may be chosen from the 
following depending on the crop and crop growth. 
Example: 
 Selection of healthy seeds 
 Weed management 
 Soil and nutrient management 
 Water management 
 Aphid management 
 Thrips management 
 Leaf folder management 
 Stem borer management 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
6 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
 
 Not all plant injury will result in yield loss 
 Case worm management. 
 BPH management 
 Leafhoppers management 
 Helicoverpa management 
 White fly management 
 Pit fall traps 
 Identification of natural enemies 
 Post harvest technology 
 Augmentation of Trichogramma 
 Botanical pesticides 
 NPB 
 Bt 
 Pheromone traps, light traps, bird perches 
 Adverse effects of pesticides 
 Diseases management 
 Soil moisture and its role 
 
 
 Soil characteristics 
 Concept of agro-ecosystem 
 Special topics on spiders 
 Harvest and post harvest techniques 
 Signs and symptoms of poisoning. 
 Rodent management 
 Safe use of pesticides 
 
Non-Formal education/Facilitation activities: 
On successful completion of the field the 
participants will conduct FFS and train farmers 
using NFE principles. Prime importance is to be 
given for NFE topics in the curriculum. The topics 
will help to strengthen farmers skills in facilitation, 
communication presentation and planning and to 
improve the individual contribution to the group. 
 
 
 
Optimum utilization of available resources (NFE): 
As all farmers are not supposed to be literate, 
therefore the method of facilitating the entire 
activities of FFS should be based on Non formal 
education (NFE). Farmers are from diverse groups 
in terms of socio-economic status, religion, caste, 
age, education, land holding, intelligence etc.  
Therefore, their  participation should be facilitated 
in such a way so that they s hould understand that 
they are conducting  serious FFS as per their 
requirements and skill. This will create their interest 
in the project. 
 
Pre and Post Evaluation 
In order to assess the level of IPM related 
knowledge before and after FFS and to know the 
impact of IPM training pre and post ballot box test 
are conducted 
 
Ballot box test: 
All ballot box tests to be conducted only in the 
fields. 
Five categories for questions to be covered. 
 Functional role of organism in ecosystem 
 Feeding potential of crop defe nder and life 
cycle 
 Damage symptoms 
 Plant compensation ability 
 Management aspects. 
Comparison of pre and post training evaluation 
results show a significant gain in the score as a 
result of the training impact. 
 
 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
7 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Reporting/ Documentation 
The facilitators s hould keep the records properly. 
They should spend one day in a week for 
preparation of reports in the prescribed format to be 
sent to the headquarters weekly. Proper FFS records 
for all activities should be mentioned for IPM and 
non-IPM fields which will help to calculate cost: 
Benefit ratio. 
Village: 
Crop: 
Crop stage: 
 
Field day: 
At the end of the season, the participants should 
organize field day in which local policy makers and 
farmers from neighboring villages are invited to the 
field site. The facili tators should remain in the 
background on this day as the participants run the 
programme. Certificates are awarded to the FFS 
participants. Format of the certificate is given in 
annexure.(in local language to be awarded to the 
farmer) 
 
Other general guidelines: 
 Farmers should be involved in planning for the 
FFS right from the beginning 
 All activities should be truly participatory 
 All efforts should be made to promote IPM 
through local media and inviting local leaders 
/progressive farmers to FFS 
 Must try to arrange visits by students and 
teacher from local school to FFS 
 
Post FFS activities: 
The post FFS activities such as follow up visit 
by the farmers and to encourage farmers to start 
IPM clubs. After 4 -6 visits the farmer participants 
should be encouraged to take up FFS activities 
which will help them to organize and continue FFS 
activities. Record keeping is an important activity. 
The facilitator should maintain one comprehensive 
record /register for each FFS. The record should 
contain the following. 
 Village profile 
 Farmer’s participations 
 Session wise activities carried out 
 Attendance  
 Raw data of all the observations made by the 
different group of farmers 
 List of materials purchased and supplied to FFS 
farmers with their acknowledgements 
 Important activities should be documented with 
photographs 
 List of bio -control agent supplied to FFS 
farmers, with their signature 
 List of technical literature supplied to FFS 
farmers, with their signature 
 IPM kits supplied to farmers with their 
signatures. 
 FFS inaugural day with photographs 
 FFS field day with photographs 
 Visitors information with their comments 
 Name of state officers, scientists of SAU or 
KVK or any other technical experts involved 
 List of honorarium paid to experts with topics 
delivered. 
 Publicity obtaine d through media, copy to be 
pasted in the register. 
 Post FFS activities  and formation of Self help 
groups. 
 FFS record register having farmers attendance 
should be countersigned by the village 
sarpanch/ADO of that area. 
 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
8 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
2. ORIENTATION TRAINING 
PROGRAMME ON FARMERS FIELD 
SCHOOL 
 
Background: 
The Farmer Field School (FFS) is farmer 
education based, lasts for the 14 session and targets 
a group consisting of 30 farmers. The FFS consists 
of informal activities, which are hands -on and 
oriented towards improved decision making.  
 
FFS will have a better  impact when it is well 
planned: 
Orientation programme on FFS will meet to the 
following objectives: 
 Improvement in the knowledge on AESA 
 Improvement in the knowledge on special 
topics 
 Improvement in the knowledge on preparation 
of session guides/technical literature. 
 Improvement in the knowledge on facilitation 
skills 
 Improvement in the knowledge on skill in 
identification of insect pest, natural enemies 
and disease symptoms 
 Improvement in the knowledge on Non -Formal 
education. 
 To create confidence among facilitators to 
make the farmers self decision makers. 
 
Goal of Farmers Field School: 
 FFS training program mes are a process in 
which IPM becomes owned by farmers. They 
don't convince farmers to adopt IPM, farmers 
convince themselves.  
 FFS as a corner stone of sustainable agriculture 
seeks to improve farmer practices in order to 
create higher profits while improving 
environment quality and community health. 
 
Orientation training programme for facilitators for 
conducting FFS: 
Days Time Activities 
Day 1 08.30-09.00 Registration 
 09.00-10.00 Inauguration 
 10.00-11.00  Concept of AESA -Field 
exercise 
 11.00-11.15 Tea break 
 11.15-11.45 Pre-evaluation test 
 11.45-13.00 Drawing, presentation and 
discussion on AESA by 
groups 
 13.00-14.00 Lunch break 
 14.00-14.30 Team building exercise 
 14.30-15.30 Insect zoo activities -Field 
exercises 
 15.30-16.30 Adverse effects of 
pesticides-Field 
demonstration 
 16.30-17.30 Use of traps 
 17.30-17.45 Review of days activities 
Day 2 08.30-08.45 Briefing of days activities 
 08.45-10.45 Collection of major 
(identified) pest of all stages 
and damage symptoms, 
collection of, natural 
enemies for the pest 
identified. Collection of 
diseases specimens 
 10.45-11.00 Tea break 
 11.00-11.30 Presentation and discussion 
on special topic 
 11.30-12.30 Concept of Farmers field 
school 
Key factors for village 
selection, potential farmers 
site selection, discussion on 
bench mark surveys 
 12.30-13.00 Discussion on Par 
experiments 
 13.00-14.00 Lunch break 
 14.00-14.30 Use of traps, preparation of 
session guides for FFS 
discussion 
 14.30-15.00 Identification of symptoms 
of diseases 
 15.00-16.00 FFS curriculum 
development by the 
facilitators choosing model 
crop 
 16.00-16.15 Tea break 
 16.15-17.15 Presentation and discussion 
on curriculum development  
 17.15-17.30 Review of days activities 
 17.30-17.45 Concluding remarks. 
 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
9 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
3. FACILITATORS GUIDE FOR SEASON 
LONG TRAINING PROGRAMME (SLTP) 
 
Introduction:  
Green revolution has made India a country of 
food scarcity to the country of food surplus and 
provided food security to the nation. But it has 
made farmers heavily to depend on chemical 
pesticide for crop protection. The chemical control 
of agricultural pests has dominated the scene, but its 
overuse has led to adverse effects on farm budgets, 
human health and the environment, as well as on 
international trade. New pest problems continue to 
develop. Integrated pest management, which 
combines biological control, host plant resistance 
and appropriate farmi ng practices, and minimizes 
the use of pesticides, is the best option for the 
future, as it guarantees yields, reduces costs, 
environmentally friendly and contributes to the 
sustainability of agriculture . The need for 
sustainable agriculture is not pestici des but 
Integrated Pest Management. Hence Government of 
India has adopted IPM as its crop protection policy 
for the country. 
 
Integrated Pest Management: 
Integrated Pest Management means a pest 
management system that, in the context of the 
associated envir onment and the population 
dynamics of the pest species, utilizes all suitable 
techniques and methods in as compatible a manner 
as possible, and maintains the pest populations at 
levels below those causing economically 
unacceptable damage or loss. 
 
Definition: 
IPM is a knowledge-intensive and farmer-based 
management approach that encourages natural 
control of pest populations by anticipating pest 
problems and preventing pests from reaching 
economically damaging levels. All appropriate 
techniques are used suc h as enhancing natural 
enemies, planting pest -resistant crops, adapting 
cultural management, and, as a last resort, using 
pesticides judiciously 
 
Promotion of IPM-Government Policy: 
Government of India has initiated a number of 
positive steps for promotion of IPM in our country. 
 Establishment of Central IPM Centers 
 Registration of Bio-Pesticides 
 Human resource Development on IPM through 
SLTP 
 Farmers Field School 
 
 
Objectives of SLTP: 
 To create more trained man power to State 
Government for imparting IPM tra ining 
programme. 
 To give up the attitude of over dependence on 
chemical pesticides 
 To change knowledge, attitude and practice of 
crop protection functionaries for better 
management practices  
 To use the modality of FFS as a learning tool 
for pest management. 
 To create confidence to participants to solve 
field problems faced by the farmers 
 To orient the participants knowledge, attitude 
and practice towards IPM 
 To work in group co-hesion 
 To provide opportunity to learn through 
discovery 
 To find solution to pr oblems through 
Participatory Action Research(PAR) 
 To understand the concept of AESA as decision 
making process 
 To motivate and to establish IPM clubs in FFS 
villages 
 
Approaches- SLTP:  
 Field oriented 
 Creates confidence to trainees to face field 
problems 
 
Components of SLTP:  
 Funds 
 Facilitators 
 Supporting staff 
 Participants 
 Field guide 
 Training facilities 
 
Funds: 
Funds are essential to conduct season long 
training programme on IPM.  To conduct 30 days 
SLTP involving 30 participants plus 7 resource 
persons and four supporting staff a reasonable fund 
is required. 
 
Items of expenditure: 
 Arrangement for inauguration 
 Accommodation arrangements for facilitators, 
participants and supporting staff 
 Honorarium for facilitators and supporting staff 
 Training materials (IPM kit) for participants 
 Training materials for field exercises 
 Field materials 
 Stationery 
 Transport arrangements 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
10 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 POL 
 Communication expenses 
 Medical expenditure 
 Honorarium for experts from outside 
 Arrangements for field day 
 Valedictory  
 Miscellaneous expenses 
 
General co-coordinator: 
The training programme should have general 
co-ordinator who is responsible for training 
expenditure and maintain the accounts for 
submission to HQ. The general coordinator should 
spend as per financial guidelines provided and 
periodically monitor the accounts to not exceed the 
limit of sanctioned budget. 
 
Resource persons & Supporting staff: 
The trainers are known as resource persons or 
facilitators and trainees as participants. 
 
Role of Resource persons: 
Resource persons provid e facilities needed for 
training. He plays the role of friend, facilitator, 
catalyst, educator, communicator, listener, 
organizer, and motivator. The selected person 
should have adequate IPM field experience and 
have undergone previous SLTP training 
programme. The resource persons are assigned to 
groups (numbering five to six)as per number of 
groups formed during the training programme. 
The floating resource persons  are specialists 
temporarily drawn to deal special topics, panel 
discussion etc. They should be from ICAR, SAU, 
State Department, research institutes, NGOs etc. 
 
Supporting staff: 
There should be minimum of four supporting staff. 
(Including drivers) They should support general 
coordinator to assist in day to day purchases, 
maintenance of accounts, preparation of reports and 
communication works etc. 
 
Participants: 
 The ideal strength for SLTP is 30 
participants.PPA/APPA (IPM) will approve the 
nomination of 30 participants. The General 
coordinator before commencement of the training 
should obtain nom ination letter from their 
controlling officer and he should submit his 
personal profile with contact address 
 If participants from different states, grouping 
should be done mixing all with at least one member 
of host state in each group. 30 participants ca n be 
grouped into five groups for providing good 
facilities. Each group should be called in the name 
of beneficial insect. Each group should select a 
leader and the group should remain throughout the 
training programme and should work as a team.  
 
Syllabus and field guide: 
The National IPM leader should arrange 
curriculum development committee at least one 
month before the training programme. The 
members of the training programme should be 
General Co-ordinator, Technical Co -ordinator, two 
technical experts. Two scientists from SAU /ICAR 
While framing the curriculum the committee should 
take into accounts the principles of IPM 
 Training Facilities: essential elements required 
for conducting SLTP 
 Office room 
 Accommodation for resource persons and 
supporting staff 
 Arrangements for food and refreshment 
 Class room facilities 
 Transport 
 Training site 
 Fields for conducting exercises 
 FFS villages 
 Recreation room for participants 
 Medical facilities 
 Support from Department/SAU/ICAR 
 
Office room: 
It is just like training control room, should have 
the facilities such as telephone, computer, Xerox 
machine, place to keep IPM kits, stationery and 
training materials for field exercise. The general 
coordinator should have an administrative staff to 
look after the general adminis tration and maintain 
accounts pertaining to the training. 
 
Accommodation: 
Good accommodation should be provided to all 
participants and resource persons involved. All 
resource persons along with participants should stay 
in the training venue itself. 
Arrangement for food and refreshment: 
The general coordinator should appoint food 
committee, where the participants must prepare 
menu within the sanctioned budget and food and 
refreshments should be supplied to the participant’s 
resource persons and supporting s taff, visitors etc. 
Deficiencies in not supplying timely may upset the 
training atmosphere. 
 
Class room facilities: 
  Class room facilities are required for 
participants to assemble, analyze, discuss and 
present the data collected from fields. The class 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
11 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
room facilities may also be used for panel 
discussion and to have discussion with experts. 
Normally it should be carried out during afternoon 
hours. Rooms should have minimum of 45 chairs, 
writing and display boards, slide projector, OHP 
and other training m aterials like drawing paper, 
sketch pens, cello tape, markers etc. 
 
Transport: 
 At least two mini buses and one Jeep are 
required for the participants and resource persons 
are needed to meet the transport requirements. The 
transport is required to visit FF S villages, study 
tours, field visits and to provide transport to floating 
resource persons. Regular vehicle with drivers may 
be drawn from Central IPM centers and from 
Department of Agriculture (Host state) 
 
Training site: 
Training site should have at lea st five acres 
with different stages of crop growth. 
 
FFS villages: 
Since participants are divided into five groups, 
five nearby villages should be selected for 
conducting practice FFS sessions.30 farmers from 
each village are to be identified. They will assemble 
on a specific day during morning hours to conduct 
FFS sessions. Field day is conducted during last 
day of the session.FFS farmers are subsequently 
encouraged to form IPM clubs to promote IPM. 
 
Recreation room: 
Since training site is normally away fr om town 
participants and resource persons need recreation 
after training hours. A separate room may be 
provided to play indoor games and to make 
newspaper/magazines available with TV facilities. 
The resource persons and facilitating group 
members can meet and plant for the next day 
activities. 
 
Medical facilities: 
First aid boxes should be made available to the 
training site. Essential common medicines for cold 
fever, dysentery, diarrhea, headache, body pain may 
be stored in office room may be given to 
participants as and when need arises. 
 
Support for SAU/ICAR/ARS: 
It is better to select training site from 
ARS/SAU/ICAR institutes. This will have facilities 
for accommodation, experimental fields also 
scientists for panel discussion. 
 
SLTP field guide: 
The cu rriculum should be based on the 
principles of IPM while drafting the training 
curriculum before the commencement of the 
training based on the principles of IPM. 
 
Principles of IPM:  
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) for sustainable 
agriculture seeks to impr ove farmer practices in 
order to create higher profits while improving 
environment quality and community health. In 
order to do this IPM implementation is based on 
four practical principles:  
 Grow a healthy crop  
 Conserve natural enemies  
 Observe field regularly. 
 Farmers become experts  
These principles describe the main actions of 
IPM implementation. Specific processes that take 
into consideration the variation of each field and 
farm family backup each principle, so that decision 
making process will be don e on a field -by-field, 
season-by-season basis. Each principle is described 
below:  
Grow a Healthy Crop  means using varieties 
resistant to major pests and diseases but well 
adapted to the local environment. The principle also 
includes using proper fertilize rs (chemical and 
organic), irrigation, and soil management which are 
critical for a healthy plant. A healthy crop can resist 
diseases and compensate for damage caused by 
diseases and insects so that plant injury does not 
always lead to yield-losses. A robust healthy crop is 
the first step in IPM methods, and foundation for an 
optimal yield.  
 
 
Conserve Natural Enemies. In all agricultural 
ecosystems, there are predators (e.g. insects, 
spiders, frogs, etc.), parasites and diseases which 
attack eggs, larvae, nymphs, pupae, and adult stages 
of insect pests. These "natural enemies" occur 
naturally in all fields, orchards and vegetable fields. 
They biologically control most insect pests most of 
the time. Learning to recognize and manage these 
natural enemies is one major focus of IPM training 
so that they are not destroyed by unnecessary 
applications of herbicides, insecticides and 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
12 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
fungicides but are allowed to  work for the farmer's 
benefit. 
 
Conserve natural enemies: 
Observe Fields regularly  is necessary to asse ss 
crop development, diseases, weeds, rats, and Insect 
pest populations. In most cases, an experienced 
IPM farmer does this observation during a short 
time (usually less than a few minutes per field) 
while carrying out other crop maintenance activities 
(irrigation, etc.). Observations should determine 
how the crop is growing and if there are pests or 
usually present and sufficient to keep pests at low 
numbers. Weather conditions, soil nitrogen levels, 
and degree of host plant resistance will determine if 
diseases will subside or become more serious. In 
the case of rats, community level dynamics 
determine rat infestations and control programs. 
IPM Farmers must be knowledgeable of these 
factors to properly and economically manage crops. 
In some cases natural e nemies, plant resistance and 
plant compensation cannot prevent yield -losses due 
to weeds, rats, insects, or diseases. Proper 
assessments must be made to effectively and 
profitably manage the use of inputs such as labor, 
quality seed, resistant varieties, f ertilizers, drainage 
systems, community organizing and pesticides in 
order to ensure profitable production. Observation 
skills and decision making are key to becoming an 
expert IPM farmer and require field level practice 
for most farmers and extension staff.  
 
  
Farmers Become Experts  is necessary for a 
modern agriculture in which farmers are 
responsible for farm level management. Future 
gains in yields, profits, and sustainability will be the 
result of farmers making better use of available and 
new techn ologies and limited resources. More 
emphasis in all agriculture programs must be placed 
on the ability of farmers to make better decisions, 
increase their own efficiency, and become better 
managers. The future of food production and food 
security will depe nd on how well farmers can 
innovate and manage systems. IPM is implemented 
by farmers and thus requires an emphasis on 
farmers' skills and knowledge.  
 
 
Basic Concepts and Assumptions:  
 IPM is not a "packaged technology" that is 
"adopted" by farmers. IPM is a process of 
decision making and farming which is 
gradually improved with greater ecological 
knowledge, and observation skills.  
 IPM skills and concepts are best learned, 
practiced, and debated in the field. The field is 
the best teacher. Stay away from  energy 
intensive multi-media lecture halls.  
 Season-long training courses allow all plant, 
insect, disease, and weed development 
processes and management to be observed and 
validated over time. IPM training must be 
carried out over all crop stages.  
 Farmers must be allowed to actively participate 
and share their experiences during training to 
achieve maximum interest and effectiveness. 
Local or indigenous knowledge of the 
environment, varieties, pests, etc. must play a 
major role during decision making.  
 Trainers must not lecture, but should facilitate a 
process of learning. Trainers do not convince 
farmers, but rather provide structured 
experiences so farmers can test IPM methods 
and convince themselves about which  are 
useful and which are not. 
 The content  of IPM training programs for 
extension staff and farmers are not limited to 
the traditional "plant protection methods" (e.g. 
mechanical, biological, cultural, mechanical, 
and ETLs) but also includes the following:  

CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
13 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
  
  
Crop development and physiology  
 
Agronomic methods for a healthy crop 
 
  
Varietal impact for maximum yield Soil fertility 
management for higher yields 
  
  
Minimize Pest insect and damage impact Conserve 
natural enemies  
 Helps to develop Observation skills 
  
 
 
 
Helps to focus on envir onmental issues to 
understand managerial skills 
Economic threshold Level & AESA: 
 Economic threshold levels (ETLs) are not used 
for field level decision making throughout most 
of this Facilitator's Guide. The ETLs are 
replaced with the Agro - Ecosystem Analy sis 
methods that integrate more decision making 
parameters. The reason for moving away from 
ETLs perhaps should be explained here since 
most IPM programs are based at least to some 
degree on ETLs.  
 The first and greatest problem of ETLs is the 
variability of parameters used for ETL 
computation. The three main parameters of the 
ETL are management costs (Rs/ha), the 
commodity price (Rs/kg), and the damage 
coefficient which is the rate of yield loss per 
damaging factor (e.g. kg/ha loss per degree of 
soil drought, or kg/ha loss per density of insects 
no. /hill). Management costs depend on the type 
of compounds used (cheap or expensive), 
access to tools (owned or rented), labor costs 
(own or hired), differences between regions 
(near cities or far from cities), an d many other 
conditions. Commodity prices are stable in 
some areas for crops, but prices for many crops 
often fluctuate depending on local markets. 
Finally, the damage coefficient will vary 
according to the variety, water availability, 
weeds in the field, nutrient levels, weather, 
farmer competence in growing the crop, disease 
infection, stage of the plant, plant spacing, etc. 
More important is that not all injury leads to 
yield loss. In the case of over -compensation 
displayed by some crops (e.g. cotton), s ome 
injury actually leads to an increase in yields. In 
the almost all cases, published ETLs do not 
apply to the field situation at hand. The 
computed ETL applies only  
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
14 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Developing an IPM training program requires 
several steps in order to build the necessar y 
scientific knowledge, cadre of trainers. The national 
seasonal long training programs have found that the 
following steps are essential for IPM training to 
move from a "good idea" to an established national 
IPM training programme. 
Step 1. Curriculum setting  
Step 2. Arrangement for Core Trainer -
Facilitators  
Step 3. Carry-out Season-Long Training of IPM 
Trainers  
Step 4. Implement Farmer Field Schools  
Step 5. Develop follow-up activities 
 
Training of IPM Trainers:  
It is assumed that recruits for Core IPM trainers 
already are proficient in growing crops from land 
preparation to harvest. It is also assumed that they 
have a good knowledge of the crop ecosystem and 
are comfortable with working full -time in the field. 
The Core IPM Trainer's course will focus on those  
I. Course content  
• Training management of SLTP for IPM Field 
Trainers  
• Leadership skills  
• Non-formal adult education skills  
• Work plan, and proposal development skills  
• Problem solving and supervision skills  
 
II. Duration  
The refresher Training  Course is typically 5 
days in length and can directly precede the SLTP 
for 30 days duration. 
The refresher training program should carry out 
basic activities on non -formal adult education 
methods and theory, leadership methods and theory, 
and management methods (work plan development) 
(Curriculum for refresher training course enclosed). 
The training program should also review the 
curriculum for the season -long training based on 
local need, crop and field situations. 
 
Season-Long Training of IPM Field Trainers:  
The Season-Long Training of IPM Field Trainers is 
the basic course required for field trainers to 
become proficient in growing a crop, in 
implementing IPM, and in learning how to 
implement IPM training through the Farmer Field 
School model. The seaso n-long duration of the 
program is to insure that all crop stages are studied 
and all management decisions are seen through to 
their economic ends  
 
 
 
Objectives:  
• By the end of the course, the trainers will be 
able to:  
• Grow a healthy crop  
• Make effective plant protection field decisions 
dealing with insect and disease pests, rats, 
weeds, birds, and snails (where appropriate) 
while considering local ecological, social and 
economic situations.  
• Solve new problems presented in the field.  
• Initiate training fa rmers using the Farmer Field 
School education model 
 
Rational for Season-long Training.  
• The season-long nature of training is required 
for several scientific and social factors 
including;  
• Pest problems are specific to each stage of crop 
so training should be carried out over all stages 
of the crop.  
• Population dynamics, disease epidemics, plant 
compensation, and crop development are 
processes completely.  
• The outcome of management decisions made 
during one crop stage is observable only at 
another later cr op stage, and most often at 
harvest (e.g. profitability, yield and yield 
components). 
• Extension workers are often isolated from 
scientific and social advisors and therefore must 
be able to solve most problems without outside 
assistance. Longer field based training provides 
these skills 
 
Training methodology: 
Training methodology is adopted to implement 
the syllabus is participatory training methods. It is 
learning by doing on the line of Non -Formal 
education. Hence participants feel to express 
themselves, i nvolve actively and have higher 
motivation. Participatory approach gives priority on 
experiences sharing, on farm experimentation and 
exercise, case studies, role play, brain storming, 
group dynamics, group discussion, assignments, 
panel discussion etc. Fi eld exercises on SLTP 
should be arranged on participatory training 
method. Field exercise guide for the specific crop 
should be on the model of field guide of discovery 
based exercises for rice IPM as given below. 
 
Significant activities of SLTP 
Crop Physiology: 
Studies of crop physiology: when a crop attains 
different stages, pests and diseases occurrence also 
vary. Hence the participants should have through 
knowledge on morphology and physiology of 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
15 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
different stages of the crop like seedling, vegetative, 
flowering, pod formation and grain maturity stages. 
Participants should collect plants from each stage 
and study plant characteristics viz plant height, 
number of branches, leaves, flowers and fruits, 
influence of a biotic and biotic factor on plants. 
Plant compensation ability, management practices 
to overcome adverse a biotic and biotic factors. 
Before commencement of the training arrangement 
should be made In the training site to have different 
stages of crop growth so that the participants can 
study all stages of the crop within the training 
period. 
 
Agro ecosystem analysis: 
It is a field exercises mainly used as a tool to 
educate the participants/farmers to analyze the field 
situation and make a decision about actions 
required in the field. It is a group  exercise having 
set of rules and is carried out under the guidance of 
resource persons.. It consists of four stages. Field 
observation, analysis of observation data, drawing 
and presentation. Participants/farmers groups have 
to carry out AESA every prescr ibed day in a week 
and in their drawing charts should make 
recommendations for implementation during the 
week. It is a vital exercise to make 
participants/farmers experts in the field on decision 
making process. 
 
Special topics: 
To deal the topics such as water, weed nutrient 
management, management of soil and disease 
management. Special topics should focus on major 
pest, symptoms of their damage, management 
practices, insect ecology; pesticide poisoning, 
adverse effects of pesticides etc may be discussed. 
The topics are also given. 
 
Participatory Action Research: 
This exercise involves participants in studying 
field problems and finding solutions to them. It is 
primary learning strategy for empowering 
participants and only secondary as producing 
results. It is mainly used as collective investigation 
to initiate community actions on solving local 
problems. It is normally a season long exercise with 
weekly observation and decision making. The 
models for PAR are also given. Varietal impact, 
IPM vs. Non -IPM, sim ulation studies, water 
management and Nutrient management etc. PAR 
encourages participants/farmers to play a central 
role to find solutions to their field problems.  
 
 
 
Non formal education: 
NFE is an activity or force which works to 
achieve common goal of the group. Each group has 
a leader and takes a collective decision. Once 
collective decision is made, then execution is the 
responsibility of all members of the group. The 
leader must accord due recognition to all members 
in achieving the group’s goal. He  should not take 
credit for himself. It is a team building exercise 
from which group members learn how to work 
together and contribute for the success of the group. 
It creates healthy competition between the groups 
and motivates for high involvement. The g roup 
dynamics should provide enjoyment to the 
participants by breaking the monotony and to come 
out with desired results. The example of group 
dynamics are water brigade, tower building 
message relay nine dot game, no lifting of pen etc. 
 
Farmers Field Sch ool Activities (FFS practice 
session): 
 SLTP has in build provision to conduct FFS 
simultaneously. This provides opportunity to 
participants to understand field based learning 
experiences involving the farmers, the need to 
transfer IPM skills immediately to the farmer and to 
conduct FFS after SLTP 
 During SLTP five participants groups are 
conducting FFS on the crop selected for IPM 
training. Hence organizer should select a training 
time when SLTP site and FFS villages have the 
crop selected for the training . Normally whatever 
participants learnt in SLTP during the week period 
in on the basis for preparation of lesson plan for 
conducting FFS in the week or participants can 
make file visits to FFS village one or two days in 
advance, observe crop condition and prepare lesson 
Plan for FFSs A model FFS curriculum is 
developed and enclosed. Each group visits the 
village on a particular day in a week, meets 30 
selected farmers and conduct FFS session. A set of 
activities to be carried out during FFS sessions are 
also given. FFS farmers should undergo pre and 
post evaluation tests. The main aim is to introduce 
IPM concepts and principles. FFS farmers should 
be encouraged to form IPM clubs to continue IPM 
activities.  
 
Course evaluation: 
SLTP needs periodic evaluation to assess the 
training impact. Evaluation activities strengthen 
training design and increase feeling of ownership. 
Pre and post evaluation are carried out through 
ballot box test methods. Mid –term evaluation is 
carried out by written test in the middle of  the 
training programme. Daily evaluation is done by 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
16 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
itemized response technique i.e. Inviting opinions 
of participants about the training activities and 
listing out good things and for wrong things for 
improvement needed on the day and suggestions for 
improvement. Resource persons should take 
immediate steps to act on suggestion on 
improvements. Such feedback provides information 
about learning and feelings of participants to the 
resource persons who can re -orient the training 
activities to the extent poss ible in response to feed 
back. 
  
Activities for SLTP in detail 
Course Activities:  
The objectives are met through intensive study. 
There are season-long field activities which provide 
plant protection concepts, crop production skills, 
and Farmer Field Scho ol training skills. There are 
also topic specific activities that are completed in a 
two to four hour sessions. All topics are learned 
through experiential hands -on activities, allowing 
for maximum learning to take place. The methods 
are designed to build on the current level of 
experience, knowledge and skills of the trainees. 
The TOT participants are divided into teams of 4 -6 
participants. The inter -related training components 
in the Training of IPM Field Trainers field course 
include the following:  
 
Season-long Field Studies carried out by 
trainees:  
• IPM vs. Farmer Practice  Comparison (to be 
carried out by all training groups). All field 
work carried out by trainers including 
production, data collection, data analysis, and 
report writing.  
• Classical IPM Field Studies  (2-4 studies per 
training group). All field work is carried out by 
trainees including production, data collection, 
data analysis, and report writing.  
 
 Examples of Field Study titles:  
 
  Nitrogen efficiency and impact on pests  
 
 
  P or K response and impact on pests   
 
 
  Variety evaluation and impact on pests  
 
 
  De-tillering plant compensation simulation  
 
Defoliator plant compensation simulation  
 
No spray on susceptible and resistant varieties  
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
17 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
Weed management comparisons  
 
 
Collection of natural enemies, disease, insect 
pest 
Topic Specific "Field Guide Activities" are 
carried out in the field or open room and focus on 
the following IPM skill and concept areas:  
• Stage specific plant physiology and plant 
compensation  
• Diseases and epidemiology  
• Weeds  
• Insect pests, detritivors, and natural enemies  
• Ecosystem management (sampling, decision 
making)  
• Agricultural poisons  
• Health and environment issues  
• Group dynamics, Non-formal education  
• Management Skills (work plans and leadership) 
 
Non-Formal Adult Education Methods & 
Processes:  
During the SLTP trainees will learn about NFE 
methods and processes and group dynamics. They 
will develop skills to act as a facilitator during 
farmers' training in which farmers will discover 
through experiential learning ecological relations in 
the crop ecosystem.  
 
Management skills:  
Trainees will also learn other skills, e.g. 
budgeting, necessary to conduct and organize FFS 
in their own districts. 
 
Special topics: 
Delivered by experts on specific top ics. These 
topics should cover specific areas of interest to IPM 
including technical and social aspects. The 
involvement of NGO's, universities, researchers, 
and others during this time provides the participants 
with exposure to numerous resource persons a nd 
topics of local value and not already included in the 
course materials.  
 
 
Farmer Field School (FFS): 
  Planning should be carried out during the SLTP 
period. Planning includes decisions on how 
participants will be chosen, where the FFS study 
field will  be situated, time of implementation, 
weekly topics, , opening ceremony, Field Days, 
certificates for farmers, and other aspects of making 
an implementation plan to be approved by local 
state officials ,University etc) 
A "Field Day" should be organized at the end 
of the SLTP for participants to present the result of 
field studies, field guide activities, and FFS 
planning. The goal of the Field Day is to ensure that 
participants will be able to implement IPM 
programs in their area. The success of the trainin g 
programme is determined by the participants work 
after the SLTP 
 
Training/Facilitation Team: 
The Season -Long training programme should 
be carried out by a Training/Facilitation Team in 
addition to the support staff necessary for training 
logistics. The Team should have one or two trainers 
with experience in running Season -Long IPM 
training, have extensive experience in the field as 
well as in running the day to day management of a 
SLTP 
While Senior Trainers manage the SLTP 
implementation, the Facilitator/ Training team will 
carry out day to day supervision and teaching of the 
participants. The team members should have 
already participated in the Core Trainers Training 
and have practical field skills since they will be in 
the field with participants on a dai ly basis. A ratio 
of 1 trainer to 5 participants is desired. 
This team should be at the SLTP site one week 
before the training to make preparations. This team 
should also meet daily to prepare for training, and 
make a daily evaluation of the program. Durin g 
actual training, the senior trainer can lead many 
activities, but it is preferable if the trainers share in 
this responsibility until participants can take over 
some of the training activities 
The Training Team should maintain open 
communication with par ticipants with frequent 
formal and in -formal evaluations/discussion on the 
progress of trainings.  
 
Weekly Training Programme:  
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
18 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Each morning, the teams will spend time in 
their Field Studies to take care of the field 
(irrigation, weeding, fertilization, pest management, 
etc.), and collect data for the Field Study 
implementation. 
No. Day Activities 
1 Monday Crop physiology 
Agronomy 
2 Tuesday Agro ecosystem analysis field 
observation, presentation and 
discussion, Non formal 
education 
3 Wednesday  Participatory action research, 
Special topics, Non formal 
education 
4 Thursday Insect pests, natural enemies, 
panel discussion 
5 Friday Farmers field school and 
feedback from FFS 
6 Saturday Field visit and review of 
weeks activities 
 
Study fields: 
• Study Fields with a total area of about 5 Ac for 
40 trainees will be needed for field work during 
the training. The fields should be close 
(walking distance) to the training site. 
• Pre-SLTP Preparations  
• There are numerous pre -TOT preparations that 
must be done 2 to 3 w eeks prior to the course 
initiation. Usually this will require one or more 
SLTP trainers to be on si te before the training 
begins.  
• Field Preparation should be done beginning 2 -3 
weeks before the beginning of the SLTP. If the 
trainees are too learn how to prepare land, and 
then set aside a small area for experience. 
However, to save time the fields should be 
ready for layout of field studies and p lanting 
before the SLTP begins. 
• Materials for training should be listed and 
bought before training. Seed, fertil izer, 
manures, field signs and labels, etc. should be 
ready on the first day of training. Other training 
materials such as paper, markers, name tags, 
hats, shirts, etc. shoul d also be purchased 
beforehand. 
• Logistics such as transportation, sleeping 
arrangements, meals, bathing, clothes washing, 
telephone/mail service, newspapers, recreation 
(football, badminton, TV, video), religious 
services, etc. should be considered before 
trainees arrive. 
• A pre -test (field based ballot box style, and/or 
written exam) sh ould be prepared to test 
trainees during the first days of the SLTP. The 
pre-test should be field based to test recognition 
of insect pests, diseases, weeds, natural 
enemies, damage, etc. as well as problem 
solving. A written pre -test could also be given 
to test basic knowledge on life cycles, 
pesticides, health and environmental issues. 
The pre-test should be repeated at the end of the 
course to help evaluate the effectiveness of the 
training. 
 
 
Resource Persons:  
 Resource persons are non -resident trainers and 
other experts that can provide practical inputs 
to the SLTP. Typically, researchers, university 
professors, international visitors, NGOs, and 
others can provide some refreshing input to the 
season-long training. However, it is important 
to provide some tips to these resource persons 
 Go to the field together for field walks where 
questions and answers can take place.  
 Leave slides and lectures until after field 
interactions.  
 Request the resource person to be as 
"participatory" as possible.  
 Be sure tha t the resource person gives an 
address and other contact information for future 
reference by trainees.  
 
Farmers' Field Schools (FFS ) ( Practice FFS 
sessions): 
The SLTP is designed to prepare participants to 
become trainers in FFS is to be organized during 
the SLTP course, 5 FFS should be organized in 
communities nearby the SLTP site. Villages and 
farmer groups will need to be identified before the 
start of the training. The fields used in the training 
(about 1000 m2) should be of same crop age around 
the same time as the training will start. 
  One team of participants is responsible for 
conducting one FFS. A FFS usually consists of 
about 25 farmers, which will also work in groups of 
4-6 persons during the FFS. The FFS will run in the 
morning once in a week. The trainers will be able to 
use experiences gained and exercises carried out 
during the previous week with a farmers’ group. 
The programme for the FFS will be planned every 
week together with the trainers. Ecosystem analysis 
will be done every week by the  farmers. Special 
topics will be carried out as well every session. 
Snacks should be served.  
 
At the end of a FFS, a "Field Day" will be 
organized to present the results of the FFS, other 
farmers, agricultural staff, and local government 
officials in the community. 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
19 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Farmer Field School Objectives: 
 Describe the development of the crop. 
 Describe plant compensation and give an 
example of the importance of plant 
compensation  
 Identify the ecological function, life -cycle and 
give the local name of major insect d etritions, 
insect pests and natural enemies seen in the rice 
field. 
 Identify the local name and development 
factors of major diseases found causing yield 
losses in the field (if they exist). 
 Identify rat damage and rat habitat where 
appropriate 
 Describe th e toxicity of commonly used 
pesticides (herbicides, fungicides, insecticides, 
rodenticides, and molluscicides) and methods to 
avoid exposure to pesticides. 
 Describe the effect of pesticides (herbicides, 
fungicides, insecticides, rodenticides, and 
molluscicides) on target pests, natural enemies, 
non-target pests, the environment and health of 
farmers and consumers. 
 Describe the level of potential yield -loss given 
a particular field condition and compare with 
the cost of controlling yield -loss factors 
(decision making). 
 Describe the potential development of pests in 
the field given the field conditions (plant 
development and stage, weather pattern, plant 
resistance, water levels, pests, natural enemies, 
etc.) and compare to potential management 
activity costs (irrigation, fertilization, pest 
control practices) that could be undertaken to 
improve yields and reduce impact of yield -loss 
components (decision making) 
 
Farmers Field School Activities  
Agro-Eco System Analysis. (AESA): 
17
Develop observation skills
Cont….
 
 
20
• Learn how plant compensates for damage by 
pests
Contd…
 
 
18
• Carry out simple field studies – to identify and 
count pests and beneficial insects (Defenders)
Cont….
 
 
Insect Zoo studies: 
21
• Conduct Insect zoo studies and discover functions of 
organisms in the eco-system
Contd…
 
  
Non-Formal education: 
10• Non-formal education approaches used throughout
Contd…
 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
20 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 Learning through discovery: 
12
• Farmers discover & make decisions
Contd…
 
 
Farmers Field Schoo l Activities. Practice FFS 
Sessions (One month Programme): 
The Farmer Field School (FFS) is typically 
season long training programme .However, during 
one month season long training programme the FFS 
practice sessions are restricted to four sessions only 
excluding post FFS activities. Each session begins 
in the morning and ends before lunch (one half 
day). The typical contents of the FFS are listed 
below.  
 IPM and Farmer Practice comparison trial.  
This trial is conducted on a 1000 m 2 plot supported 
by the FF S. 500 m 2 is used for the IPM field, and 
500 m2 is used for the Farmer Practice field. This 
1000 m2 field plot is used as the Study Field for the 
FFS. All other activities are conducted in these 
fields. 
 Field Trials.  The Classical IPM Study on 
"Stem borer plant compensation simulation", 
"Defoliator plant compensation simulation", 
"Nitrogen efficiency including organic materials 
and impact of pests", "Seed Production", or other 
studies can be conducted in the field. Usually on 
one or two of these studies are  undertaken by the 
FFS depending on major issues of the FFS 
participants. 
 
 Topic Specific Field Guide Activities 
 Are carried out in the field or adjacent to the field 
and cover areas related to IPM and Group 
Development. 
 
Weekly Schedule: 
Week 1:  Opening ceremony with introductions, 
Ballot-box pre -test, Field walk, problems about 
pest/disease/deficiency, Drawing Together (team 
building) Ecosystem analysis, group dynamics 
Week 2:  Agro-Ecosystem Analysis (decision 
making), exercise on Predators and parasite s. Crop 
physiology, group dynamics 
Week 3:  Agro-Ecosystem Analysis (decision 
making), bio -agents, group dynamics . Reduced 
Exposure to Pesticides & Pesticide Toxicity, health 
issues  
Week.4: Agro-Ecosystem Analysis (decision 
making) Diseases or other topic,  Group dynamics, 
Post ballot test 
Post-FFS: Inform FFS participants of pre- and 
post-test scores . Make regular visits to follow -up 
activities 
 
 
Field Trials- PAR Model  
Objectives: 
 To compare IPM methods with local farmers 
practice on conventional methods Farmers 
 To make the farmers to realize the benefits of 
AESA 
 To make the farmers to understand the adverse 
impact on pesticides 
Method 
1. Use the same agronomic practices for all 
treatments. Nitrogen applications should be basal, 
and one or two splits based  on usual practices. If 
fertilizers are not the same for IPM and farmer 
practices, be sure to include this information on all 
yield graphs and tables. 
2. Treatments. Use 3 to 4 replications per treatment 
with each plot at least 500m 2. It is better to have a 
larger plot size and less replication for this study 
because of the movement of insect pests and natural 
enemies when pesticides are applied. 
T1. IPM methods; observation and agro ecosystem 
analysis 
T2. "Farmer Practice" or "Conventional Method". 
Make a survey before the beginning of the season 
and do not change during the season as a result of 
comparison with T1. 
T3. No-spray [optional, but desirable - every person 
should try to grow rice without spraying at least in 
their life - it will change your view  of pesticides 
forever!] 
3. Make weekly Agro -Ecosystem analysis of all 
treatments. Treat T1 as necessary based on field 
observations. Treat T2 based on initial survey and 
determination of conventional methods. Do not 
treat T3 with pesticides but do check i rrigation, and 
be sure to hand weed as necessary. 
4. Measure yield at end of season. 
 
Analysis 
1. Make graphs of the insect and natural enemy 
populations. 
2. Make a cost -benefit economic analysis of all 
treatments. Include health and environmental 
impacts if possible. 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
21 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
Learning through Experiments: 
Model: 
Plant Compensation studies- PAR Model 
Objectives: 
To demonstrate the level of plant compensation 
due to damage similar to stem borer damage 
Methods 
1. Use IPM agronomic methods 
2. There are 10 treatments w hich should be 
replicated 4 times per treatment. Plots may be 
small. 
T1. At 14 DAT, cut 10% of tillers in 1 m2 block. 
T2. At 14 DAT, cut 20% of tillers in 1 m2 block. 
T3. At 14 DAT, cut 30% of tillers in 1 m2 block. 
T4. At 30 DAT, cut 10% of tillers in 1 m2 block. 
T5. At 30 DAT, cut 20% of tillers in 1 m2 block. 
T6. At 30 DAT, cut 30% of tillers in 1 m2 block. 
T7. At 55 DAT, cut 5% of panicles in 1 m2 block. 
T8. At 55 DAT, cut 10% of panicles in 1 m2 block. 
T9. At 55 DAT, cut 15% of panicles in 1 m2 block. 
T10. No tiller cutting: Control. 
3. Cages may or may not be used. In the case that 
cages are not used, the actual level of damage 
should be computed for final analysis.  
4. Sampling: Weekly sample the tiller number, % 
dead hearts and % whiteheads. Note any  other 
insect, disease or rat damage. At the end of the 
season, measure the yield of the 1 m2 block in each 
replication. 
Results 
1. Compute the actual damage for each replication 
and treatment if there was any natural infestation. 
2. Plot the yields for each treatment. 
 
Discussion: 
1. What was the effect of the simulated damage on 
yield? Was any plant compensation evident? What 
would happen if the nitrogen level was higher? 
What does this mean for usual farmer practice? Do 
sprays for defoliation reduce yiel d loss, or increase 
the chance for BPH resurgence? 
 PAR- Model  
Yield and pest response to nitrogen dosage. 
Objectives: 
 To understand the nitrogen response 
study for observation of pests and yield effects 
 To know excess application of nitrogen 
results in lodging. 
 To know the excess application of 
nitrogen will result in increase of diseases such 
as blast and sheath blight 
Methods: 
1. Use agronomic practices recommended for 
your area for all inputs but nitrogen. Nitrogen 
applications should be basal, and one  or two splits 
based on usual practices. 
2. Treatments. Use 4 replications per 
treatment. (Treatments with manures can be 
introduced as well). 
 T1.  O kg N/ha 
  T2. 40 kg N/ha 
  T3. 80 kg N/ha 
  T4. 120 kg N/ha 
  T5. 140 kg N/ha 
3. Sampling: Weekly sample the tiller 
number, plant height, disease intensity, insect pest 
density, dead heart %, whitehead %, natural enemy 
density. Measure yields at the end of season. 
Results: 
Plot sampled data against nitrogen levels. Economic 
analysis of inputs vs. yields. 
Discussion topics: 
1. What was the effect of nitrogen on plant 
development and yields? 
2. What was the effect of nitrogen on insect pests 
and natural enemies? 
3. Which level was most profitable? Which level 
was not risky in terms of potential disease or 
lodging? 
4. What do you conclude about the usage of 
nitrogen? What will happen to rice yields when 
nitrogen costs increase in twenty years with 
increasing petroleum costs? 
PAR -Model 
Simulation of Defoliation 
Objectives: 
 To understand the simulation effects of 
defoliation on yield loss 
 To know whether the plant ability to 
compensate the leaf damage 
Methods 
1. Use IPM agronomic methods 
2. There are 9 treatments which should be 
replicated 4 times per treatment. Plots may be 
small. Leaf cutting means to cut each lea f on the 
plant. 25% means one quarter of the leaf blade, and 
50% means one half of the leaf blade. 
T1.At 14 DAT cut 25% of all leaves in 1 m2 block. 
T2.At 14 DAT cut 50% of tillers in 1 m2 block. 
T3.At 30 DAT cut 25% of tillers in 1 m2 block. 
T4.At 30 DAT cut 50% of tillers in 1 m2 block. 
T5.At 55 DAT cut 25% of tillers in 1 m2 block. 
T6.At 55 DAT cut 50% of tillers in 1 m2 block. 
T7.At 70 DAT cut 25% of panicles in 1 m2 block. 
T8.At 70 DAT cut 50% of panicles in 1 m2 block. 
T9. No leaf cutting: Control. 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
22 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
3. Cages may or may not be used. In the case that 
cages are not used, the actual level of damage 
should be computed for final analysis. 
4. Sampling: Weekly sample the tiller number, % 
dead hearts and % whiteheads. Note any other 
insect, disease or rate damag e. At the end of the 
season, measure the yield of the 1 m2 block in each 
replication. 
 
Results: 
1. Compute the actual damage for each replication 
and treatment if there was any natural infestation. 
2. Plot the yields for each treatment. 
 
Discussion: 
 What was the effect of the simulated damage on 
yield? Was any plant compensation evident? What 
would happen if the nitrogen level was higher? 
What does this mean for usual farmer practice? Do 
sprays for defoliation reduce yield loss, or increase 
the chance for BPH resurgence? 
 
Specimen Collections- Diseases and insect pest  
Disease Collection: 
 
Introduction: 
 Diseases can be collected by collecting the 
plant parts which show signs of the disease. For 
example, for bacterial leaf blight (BLB), infected 
leaves of different stages of infection should be 
collected. When collecting the plant parts, collect 
the whole tiller and keep the base of the tiller moist. 
After returning to your room, place on the infected 
parts between sheets of newspaper. Place heavy 
objects s uch as books or mattress on top of the 
papers so that the plant parts are flat when dry. 
The dried plant parts should then be glued onto a 
heavy large piece of white paper. If it is difficult to 
glue the plant part to the paper, use strips of white 
paper like tape to keep the plant on the paper. 
 After mounting, keep all sheets of papers flat 
and out of the sunlight. The collection can be kept 
in a large plastic bag to keep insects and mites out 
of the collection. Treat the collection with pesticide 
if nece ssary. Occasional drying of the collection 
will reduce pest damage. 
Note that collections are only a process in which to 
learn functions, structures and names of diseases. 
Labels are written in the lower right hand corner of 
the page on which the plant is mounted. 
All specimens should be correctly labeled with 
the following information where appropriate: 
 
Common Name (in local language) 
Name of collector 
Date collected, Place collected 
Ecological function 
Latin name with genus, species, and order. 
Thick pap er with writing in black ink should be 
used for dry labels. Thick paper and writing in 
pencil should be used for specimens in alcohol. 
 
Insect Collection: 
 
 
Introduction: 
Insects and spiders can be collected many ways. 
The best way is to sit in a field an d watch the 
insects and spiders to observe their activity and 
behavior. Keep a record of what specimens are 
doing in the field. Collecting can be done by hand, 
with a sweep net, or with an aspirator. Kill insects 
by placing the specimens in a bag with a sm all 
amount of alcohol or by placing the bag into a 
freezer for an hour. Insects, especially parasites and 
adult moths, can also be collected by collecting 
larvae or eggs in the field and rearing the insects 
until adult parasites or other insects emerge. 
Insects and spiders that are collected can be 
divided into two groups. First are hard -bodied 
insects which are usually adults. Second are soft -
bodied insects, which are usually immature nymphs 
and larvae, and soft -bodied spiders. Hard -bodied 
insects should b e placed on pins and soft -bodied 
insects and spiders should be placed in 70% 
alcohol. 
All specimens should be correctly labeled with 
the following information where appropriate: 
 
First label 
 Common Name (in local language) 
Host (plant or insect) 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
23 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Ecological function (plant feeder, predator, parasite, 
detritus feeder, etc.) 
Second label 
Name of collector  
Date collected, Place collected 
Latin name with genus, species, and order.  
 
You should use thick paper with writing in 
black ink for labels on pins. Thick  paper and 
writing in pencil should be used for specimens in 
alcohol. 
Mounting large insects on pins should be done 
on pins on the right side of the thorax when the 
head is pointing away from you. 
For small insects, the insect can be glued on a 
triangular piece of paper using most any glue (see 
below). Clear nail polish is commonly used as glue 
for this kind of mounting. 
Keep the collection in a safe place away from 
ants and other insects. Dry the insects well using a 
desk lamp. Treat with insecticide if th e collection is 
being damaged. Keeping moth balls 
(paradichlorobenzene) in the collection will reduce 
insect damage. 
Note that collections are only a process in 
which to learn functions, structures and names of 
insects. The final product is nice to look at , and 
usually very impressive, but the goal of the 
collection is the actual collecting process. 
Collecting and mounting are good ways to get to 
know the insect and spider communities in your 
area, and to understand the ecological relationships 
between organisms in an ecosystem 
 
Crop Physiology- (Rice crop - A Model) 
Anatomy and function are closely related. A 
nose has holes (anatomy) so that air can enter the 
body (function). A plant's anatomy is important to 
study to understand the function. The vessels in  the 
leaf (anatomy) are important for transport of water, 
nutrients and systemic pesticides (functions). 
Each week during the crop growth, you will 
collect, observe and draw plants. Use the 
microscopes or magnifying glasses for better 
observations. The mic ro view of the leaf surface is 
fascinating as are all other parts of the plant. 
Drawing is a tool to assist in observation, 
remembering and for recording what you have seen. 
Try to spend time to make detailed and well labeled 
drawings. 
You will find that a  deep understanding of the 
plant is the first step in understanding the effects of 
disease and insects on the rice plant. You will also 
find out why not all injury caused by diseases, 
insects and rats results in yield losses. Plant 
compensation is importan t for reducing the effects 
of injurious organisms. 
 
Tillering Ability in Vegetative Phase 
Introduction: 
During the vegetative phase, the plant is 
growing very rapidly. The initial two or three small 
plants transplanted were simple plants consisting on 
one stem, a couple of leaves and a few roots. As the 
plant grows during the vegetative phase several 
changes are taking place. On modern high tillering 
varieties, two of these changes have important 
implications for pest management: tillering ability 
and leaf growth. 
Tillering ability is an important characteristic of 
the modern varieties. Traditional varieties generally 
have few tillers and each tiller is very tall. Much 
nutrient is used for a few tillers in traditional 
varieties. Modern varieties use the same  nutrients 
for shorter plants that have more tillers and more 
potential for producing panicles. The ability of 
modern varieties to produce more tillers is related 
to their ability to use more nitrogen. In traditional 
varieties, more nitrogen result in taller plant that are 
likely to lodge (fall over) at maturity. Modern 
varieties increase the number of tillers with 
increasing nitrogen. 
Each new tiller a really a complete plant. New 
tillers produce a stem, leaves, roots, and other new 
tillers. Tillers can be  given names depending on 
where they emerge. The main tiller is the stem of 
the transplanted seedling. The primary tillers 
emerge from the main tiller. Secondary tillers 
emerge from the primary tillers, and tertiary tillers 
emerge from the secondary tiller s. The main tiller 
and the primary give most of the yield for the hill, 
especially on short maturing varieties. Secondary 
tillers also have good yield but are partly green at 
harvest. Many tertiary tillers may not produce a 
panicle if nutrients, sunlight, and water are not 
available. 
New tillers are produced from seedbed to about 
primordial stage. If the tillers from one plant in the 
hill are damaged early in the vegetative phase, more 
tillers will be produced by the other plants in the 
hill ("compensation" ). Early stem borer damage 
does not seem to effect yield because the tillers are 
easily replaced.  
The leaves on the tillers are also growing from 
seedbed to primordial stage. The leaves will emerge 
and later die. As the bottom leaves are dying, new 
leaves are emerging from the top. The process 
allows the plant to renew leaves that are damaged 
by the wind, insects, or disease. The new leaves are 
also able to grow larger because of the larger supply 
of energy from the plant as the plant grows bigger. 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
24 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
The gro wth of the new tillers and leaves is 
determined by plant spacing, water, sunlight, and 
nutrients (fertilizers) available to the plant. 
 
Objective: 
To describe the growth of vegetative stage plants in 
terms of tillering ability and leaf formation. 
Time required = 120 minutes 
Materials (per group) plants; 20 days after seeding 
(DAS), 15 and 30 days after transplanting (DAT), 
knife, pencil, papers. 
 
Procedures: 
(Do the following for each age plant) 
1. Find fields of different ages and collect plants 
from the field. Wash all the mud from the plants. 
2. Take the plants to a shady place and observe the 
plants. Begin by removing all the roots from the 
bottom so that the very bottom of the tillers is easily 
seen. Wash all mud from the base. Spread the tillers 
apart and notice how the tillers emerge from other 
tillers.  
3. Make a map of the tillers by finding the primary, 
secondary and tertiary tillers. Carefully remove the 
tillers and note where they emerge. Find the first 
primary tiller and remove from the main stem . On 
this primary tiller, find the first secondary tiller and 
remove it. If the secondary tiller has a tertiary tiller, 
remove this tiller also. Continue this process until 
you have a map of the tillers on the plant. 
4. Count the number of leaves on each t iller. Count 
the number that is dead. Notice if there are new 
leaves emerging. 
5. Each person in the group should take a turn to 
explain the structure of one of the plants to the 
group using a map. 
 
 
Discussion and Presentation: 
1. Describe the pattern of  tillering from 
transplanting through the vegetative stage. 
2. Why is continuous tillering important? 
3. What will happen when some tillers are removed 
from the plant? 
4. What is the effect of stem borers on the plant in 
the early phase. 
5. What is happeni ng with the leaves on the 
different tillers? Are there dead leaves and newly 
emerging leaves? Way is this important? 
 
Roots and Plant Vessels 
Introduction: 
Fertilizers and systemic insecticides, such as 
carbofuran, are often applied to rice plants. How do 
these nutrients and insecticides get into the plant 
and then move through the plant? 
To enter the plant, the chemicals must be 
dissolved in water. Without water, the compounds 
will not be able to move either in the soil from the 
surface to the roots, or fr om the soil into the roots. 
Once the chemical are dissolved in the water, they 
are absorbed into the plant with the water.  
Once the chemicals are inside the plant, the 
chemicals are able to move through the plant 
through a system of hose -like vessels betw een the 
roots and the top of the plant. Water moves up these 
vessels and sugars move down the vessels. 
Insects feeding on the plant by sucking or 
chewing of the vessels ingest the insecticide. Plant 
hoppers and stem borers are insect pests which can 
be con trolled using the systemic insecticides 
because they feed on vessels. Hoppers suck on the 
vessels, and stem borers eat the vessels while 
feeding inside the plant. 
After the systemic insecticide moves to the 
leaves of the rice plant, water from the vessels is 
exuded each evening. This is the small droplet of 
water found on the tips of the leaves early in the 
morning. This drop of water on each leaf contains 
the systemic pesticide. The drop falls back in the 
water or evaporates each day. If natural enemies 
come into contact with the water they will be killed 
by the systemic pesticides. The drop of water often 
falls on natural enemies or natural enemies drink 
from the drop of water. 
This activity will show how water solutions 
move through the plant. 
 
 
 
Experiment on crop physiology: 
Objective: 
1. To describe how systemic insecticides move 
through the plant. 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
25 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
2. To explain how systemic insecticides control 
insects sucking or chewing on plant vessels  
Time required  = 120 minutes (Whole time not 
used. Best to run a ctivity while doing other 
activity.) 
 
Material: 
Water, red ink or food coloring, 2 cups per group, 
plants and 2 straws 
 
Procedure for one group: 
1. Go outside and find many kinds of plants 
including rice seedling, grasses and other plants. 
2.  Add water to the 2 cups and place several drops 
of the red food coloring. The water should be dark 
red. 
3. Place the plants in the cups with the stems in the 
cups. Also place the straws in the cups. One straw 
should be flattened first. Place the plants in a bright 
place. 
4. Wait 90 minutes and observe the plants. What 
has happened to the color of the leaves? How has 
the red coloring moved in the plants? 
5. What do you think happens with rice in the rice 
field when systemic insecticides are used? Where is 
the insecticid e in the plant? What kind of insects 
suck on the fluid in the plant vessels? What kind of 
insects chew on the plant vessels? What about 
insects that feed on the leaf edge? Do they also feed 
on the main vessels? 
7. What happens after the solution reaches the tip of 
the leaf? Have you noticed the water on the leaf tips 
in the evening and morning? Where does this water 
come from and what does the solution contain? 
How might the solution effect natural enemies in 
the field? How about farmers walking in the earl y 
morning field? 
 
DISEASES MANAGEMENT 
 
 
Background: 
Diseases are an important part of crop 
protection, but are usually very difficult to 
understand in the field. This is partly because the 
causal organisms (bacteria, MLO, fungi, virus and 
nematodes) are v ery small and cannot be seen 
moving around like insects or rats. We must learn 
new ways of thinking about these organisms in 
order to have long -term control. There will be four 
activities for discussing diseases. The topics will 
cover management methods, o bservation methods, 
epidemiology (the spread of disease), and causal 
organisms. 
The most important first step in thinking about 
diseases is to realize that diseases must be managed 
not controlled. What is the difference? Management 
means a complete set of activities that support each 
other. Management means that these activities are 
carefully planned and are implemented over several 
seasons, not controlled within a single season. 
Management included control methods for 
prevention, and control methods to slo w down 
epidemics; diseases will never be completely 
eradicated - only populations reduced to very low 
levels. Management usually needs the cooperation 
of several farmers working together to reduce 
overall disease in an area. Management requires 
someone who  can observe larger areas of disease 
incidence and levels of infection. 
For an example, management of tungro in rice 
would be impossible without observing the larger 
picture of disease infection levels. The management 
system requires distribution of new va rieties, 
careful monitoring of GLH, monitoring of disease 
incidence, planting time coordination, and 
sometimes a break in planting rice. These are 
activities that are done by individual farmers, but 
managed so that the activities are carried out 
together. Think about the management needed to 
control other diseases such as polio, malaria, and 
small pox! 
What are management activities? Below is a 
summary of activities. 
 
Prevent the introduction of inoculums into the 
field in order to delay the beginning of in fection. 
This can be done by; 
a. Allowing only disease -free seed and planting 
materials (example, root stock for trees) into an 
area. This can be done at any level of organization. 
b. Destroy sources of inoculums such as materials 
in nurseries and fields with diseases. For large scale 
removal, it is useful to have funding (or insurance?) 
to compensate farmers for destruction of sources of 
inoculums (fruit trees, planted seasonal crops such 
as soybeans). 
c. Small areas planted to a particular crop before the 
main growing season for the crop should be 
avoided. These small areas build up inoculums 
which is then carried over to the next season. 
d. Farmer practice to keep disease inoculums from 
entering new fields. This is done by careful 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
26 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
purchase of materials in  the market, seed suppliers 
and plant sellers. It is also important to keep 
nematode infested soil from moving from field to 
field on the shoes of farmers, animals, and plows. 
e. Sanitation is important to keep inoculums from 
one crop getting into the next  crop. Potato blight 
(Phytophthora infestans ) can be reduced by 
removing excess old potatoes from fields. 
 
Prevent the development of inoculums after it 
enters the field.  Removal and destruction of 
inoculums can be done before planting, during the 
cropping season and after the crop is harvested. 
Deep burial of diseased plant materials by plowing, 
removal of diseased plants, burning of crop residue 
while in the field or after collection, flooding fields, 
and repeated plowing to expose fields to sunlight 
(for nematodes) are some activities that may be 
beneficial. The effectiveness will depend on many 
factors which must be analyzed for each case. 
Crop rotation is important if the rotation 
reduces inoculums. Rotation of tobacco and 
tomatoes for example is not rotation for the diseases 
which infect both crops. Crop rotations should be 
observed since there are many pathogens that 
survive on numerous types of both living and dead 
plant materials. 
Fertilization may increase or decrease diseases. 
Most people believe f ertilizers only increase 
diseases. However, there are numerous examples in 
which addition of nitrogen, potassium, or calcium 
actually reduced the effects of certain fungi. 
Management of the micro -climate is also 
important. Each site has a different micro -climate 
each season. A shady slope in the wet season will 
be different from a sunny slope in the same season. 
Crop planting times should take into consideration 
dominant diseases in the area and the effect of the 
micro-climate. 
Objective: 
1. To outline mana gement activities that could be 
organized for an area to reduce disease incidence. 
2. To use brain -storming techniques to 
increase/encourage inputs from all sources when 
problem solving or planning. 
 
Materials 
Newsprint paper (4 pieces per group) and marker 
 
Steps 
(Brain-storming is a method of getting lots of 
creative ideas. Many ideas will not be useful, but 
the ideal will act as seeds to other ideas. Discussion 
of ideas is allowed only after all ideas have been 
written down). 
1. Appoint one person as th e secretary who will 
write on the large pice of paper. DO NOT USE A 
SMALL PIECE because the whole group should be 
able to read the paper. Assign another person to be 
the facilitator. 
2. The secretary should write "Wide -Area Disease 
Management" on the top of a large piece of paper. 
3. The Facilitator should read the above 
Background for the whole group. Each member 
should make notes of thoughts that come to them 
while listening to the reading. 
4. After the reading, the Facilitator should ask the 
following question: "What are activities that can be 
done in our village to manage diseases on our crops 
(all crops)." 
5. The group members should tell the 
secretary their idea. The secretary will write down 
the idea. NO COMMENTS ARE ALLOWED BY 
OTHER MEMBERS AT THIS P OINT. If any 
member makes comments, the Facilitator must ask 
the person to be quite. 
6. Continue writing down ideas with no discussion 
until the first page is full. 
7. After the page is full, discuss each idea beginning 
at the tope of the list. The Facilit ator should be sure 
each person can make some comments. The 
Secretary should summarize the discussion on each 
point. Write the summaries on another large piece 
of paper. 
8. Present the summaries of ideas to the whole 
group. 
9. If there is time, do the same  process with 
the following question, "What can extension staff 
do to help manage diseases in our village?” 
 
MANAGEMENT OF WEEDS  
Introduction: 
Weeds reduce yields by competing with the rice 
plants for sunlight, moisture, and soil nutrients. 
Weeds may affe ct farming in many ways. For 
example, fertilizer applied my not increase yields in 
weedy fields because weeds absorb nitrogen more 
effectively than the rice plants. Also weeds are 
harmful because they may be alternate hosts for 
insect and disease pests of rice, and provide shelter 
for rats. Usually weed problem is more serious in 
dry land and dry seeded rain fed than in lowlands. 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
27 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
However, if both left to grow in the field it can 
result to reduce yields. 
Objectives: 
1. Classify weeds according to economic 
significance. 
2. Identify factors that contribute to severe 
occurrence of weeds in the field. 
3. Develop management strategies for weeds. 
 
Time requirements: 90 minutes 
 
Materials required: marker pen, crayon, pen, and 
notebook 
 
Procedure: 
1. Each group shou ld assess weed population in 
different areas in the rice fields. 
2. Each group should collect as many different 
species of weeds from the rice field. 
3. Each group should classify weeds collected 
according to their gross morphology, qualifying 
characteristics (i.e. perennial or annual) and 
distribution. 
4. Process data. 
5. Distribute discussion question to each group. 
6. Present and discuss answer with the big group. 
 
 
Cyprus 
Discussions questions 
1. Among weeds collected, which weeds are 
difficult to control? Why?  
2. Based on your experiences, on what stage of the 
rice crop is critical to weed competition? 
3. What are weed management practices can you 
recommend for direct seeded rice? For 
transplanted? 
4. What are your general recommendations to 
manage weeds? 
5. How will you justify that weeds are also useful to 
farmers? 
Rats 
Rats are one of the most consistent and serious 
pests of rice. The main problem of rat control is that 
rats must be controlled by community action, and 
organizing communities is not an easy task. 
There are a few differences between rats and insects 
that make implementation of management different. 
First is the ability of rats to stay in one area even 
though there is no crop. This means that we can use 
damaged caused in one season to initiate controls in 
the next season. The other difference is the methods 
of control. Rat control must be organized over a 
wide area to be very effective. Rat drives, baiting, 
digging, and any other method of control is most 
effective when done as a community. 
Rat Population Growth 
 
 
 
Introduction 
Rat populations increase very rapidly because 
rats have many offspring very often. Rats can live 
for one year or longer. Females may reproduce up 
to 4 times a year and have an average of 6 offspring 
in a litter. Th is exercise is designed to visualize 
simple population growth for one year. 
Objective 
1. Able to show rat population growth over several 
months using nails, seeds or other items. 
2. Able to ask leading questions about rat 
populations to bring out two manag ement points; 
(1) It doesn't matter how many rats were killed, it 
only matters how many rats remain in the field, and 
(2) continuous rat control is important to keep 
populations low. 
 
Time required = 120 minutes 
 
Materials (per group) 
2500 Bengal gram seeds, glue and paper, pencil and 
pen 
 
Procedure 
1. This can be done using nails on wood or seed on 
paper on the piece of large paper. 
2. In the first section place 2 seeds. One nail 
represents one female rat, and the other represents a 
male rat. 
3. Move to th e first month. Add 6 seeds for 6 
offspring from the original pair of rats. 3 rats are 
females and 3 rats are male. 
4. Move to the fourth month. Add 6 seed for 6 
offspring from the original female, then add 18 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
28 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
seeds for the 3 females in first month (3 femal es 
times 6 offspring each). Half of the nails are female 
rats. 
5. Move to the seventh month. Add 6 seeds for 6 
offspring from the original female, then add 18 
seeds for the 3 females in first month (3 females 
times 6 offspring each). Add 72 (12 females wit h 6 
offspring each) for offspring from females in the 
fourth month. Half of the seeds are female rats. 
6. Continue this process for the 10th and 13th 
months. 
 Write on the paper the total number of rats for 
each of the months, and the cumulative total from  
month to month. 
 
Discussion and Presentation 
1. How many rats are produced in one year? (One 
section is three month) 
2. If half of the rats are killed in the seventh month, 
how many rats will be produced by the end of 
twelve months? 
3. If there are 10 female rats in the first month, how 
many rats will be produced in the 13th month? If 
you organize a rat drive and kill this many rats, will 
you be very excited and call your rat drive a 
success? How many rats are remaining in the field? 
Do you think the rat d rive was a success still? How 
many rats will be in the field the next month 
considering reproduction? (Note that reproduction 
is even greater after many rats are killed because of 
less competition for food and space!) 
4. What is the meaning of the saying " It doesn't 
matter how many rats were killed, it only matters 
how many are left in the field to reproduce". 
5. Many farmers say that if you kill rats, they will 
bring their friends and completely destroy a field. 
Can you explain why fields are destroyed aft er one 
rat drive? (remember reproduction, and that 
reproduction is faster when the population is 
lower). 
6. Why is it important to begin killing rats early in 
the rice? Why is it important to keep killing rats all 
season long? What would be the population of rats 
after 6 months if only 1 female from each group of 
six offspring survived? 
Totals by month; 1st month -6/ 4th month -24/ 7th 
month-96/ 10th month -384/ 13th month -1536/ 
Total 2046!!! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INSECT ZOO 
 
 
Introduction 
The goal of the Insect Zoo is to help you learn 
about insects and their natural enemies by direct 
observation and manipulation. Insects and spiders 
are more interesting when seen alive and active. 
Think of going to the zoo...a tiger that is tearing the 
flesh from a rabbit is much more int eresting than a 
snoring tiger hidden in a corner. Imagine a spider 
sucking the juices from a writhing first instar stem 
borer larva or leaf folding by a leaf folder. A living 
organism is much more than what is seen in an 
alcohol filled jar. 
In fact some th ings can only be recognized 
when living - the small water striders ( Microvelia) 
is an example. The ripples on the water as the water 
striders glides across the water surface are their 
most distinguishing characteristic. They are like 
sharks; they cruise ar ound in the water and when a 
larva or BPH drops on the water, a whole group 
will attack together. 
The activity and behavior of insects and natural 
enemies can only be seen on live specimens. The 
Insect Zoo will give you many living specimens for 
demonstrations that will keep farmers and others 
more involved while watching spider females eat 
their mating partners, and help them remember 
better something about the message that predators 
and parasites are friends in the field. 
The Insect Zoo will also help you  learn about 
the biology of the animals. Life cycles, egg laying, 
feeding, mating, growth and behavior can be 
learned directly the process of rearing insects and 
their natural enemies. 
There are many ways to rear insects and their 
natural enemies. Many par asites can be obtained 
directly from their host by collecting eggs, mature 
larva, and pupae from the field and placing in a 
container of some type. Any plastic, glass, or paper 
container will work. Place the collected specimens 
in the container and merely wait. If the specimens 
were parasitized, the small wasps will emerge. 
Preying mantis egg cases, stem borer egg masses, 
large caterpillars, and hopper eggs are the easiest 
and most often parasitized specimens to rear. 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
29 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
For other insects and spiders, collecti ng young 
hopper (BPH) nymphs, adult moths or spiders is the 
best way to begin rearing these groups. However, 
for nymphs and for adult moths, you must have 
prepared plants ahead of time. For spiders, it is best 
to have lots of insect prey in a rearing cage before 
beginning to rear. 
For parasites that are not collected from hosts, 
it is sometimes possible to put "sponge plants" in 
the field. This means that from reared insects you 
have plants in pots with egg masses or larvae. 
These plants with the host are placed in the field for 
up to four days to attract the parasites. The parasites 
will lay their eggs in or on the host. The "sponge" is 
then brought back to the pot area and kept in a cage. 
 
Objective  
Rear the following insects and spiders for the life 
stages shown to understand the functional role. 
 Hoppers: adult to adult 
 Stem borer: adult moth to first instar 
 Leaf folder: adult moth to first instars 
 Rice bug: keep nymphs and adults for one week 
 Various larvae: larva to adult 
 Hunting spiders: keep for one week 
 Web-making spiders: keep until makes web 
 Ladybeetle larvae and adults: keep for one 
week 
 Other predators: keep for one week 
 Stem borer egg mass parasites: keep egg 
masses until adult parasite emerges 
 Leaf folder larval parasites: keep larva until 
adult parasite emerges 
 Other caterpillar parasites: keep larvae or 
parasite pupae (especially Apanteles) until adult 
parasite emerges 
 Demonstrate the following processes using the 
insects and spiders in your Insect Zoo. These 
are the most important processes in  the rice 
ecosystem which effect the crop and pest 
dynamics. 
 Demonstrate hopper feeding on the plant 
 Demonstrate hopper development from nymph 
to adult  
 Demonstrate eggs in the stem of the plant 
 Demonstrate hopper mating 
 Demonstrate egg laying and egg mass es of 
collected adult stem borer moths 
 Demonstrate emergence of first instars stem 
borers 
 Demonstrate eggs and larvae of leaf folders 
 Demonstrate rice bug feeding on the panicle 
 Demonstrate adults of field collected larvae  
 Demonstrate predation of hunting  spiders 
(number consumed per day) using hoppers for 
food 
 Demonstrate web -making of web -making 
spiders 
 Demonstrate moth predation by web -making 
spiders 
 Demonstrate larval and adult ladybeetle 
predation (number consumed per day) of hoppers 
 
     
 
 
 
Demonstration of predator -prey relationship 
Parasites emerging from especially Apantles 
parasite pupae 
  
 
 Demonstration of leaf folder egg parasites 
 
Time Requirements for Insect zoo 
Each week at least two hours is needed special for  
the Insect Zoo.  
Materials 

CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
30 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Plants, cages, small plastic bottles, plastic bags 
Procedures for Rearing 
There are many ways of rearing insects and spiders. 
Below are some general methods and some specific 
tips for specific insects: 
General Rearing Methods 
1. Bottles and Plastic Bags  are very useful rearing 
tools. Always carry a couple in your pocket or bag. 
If egg masses, larvae or nymphs are found in the 
field, collect and place in the bottle or plastic bags. 
The bottle should have a piece of netting over th e 
mouth of the bottle. Add plant material daily for 
herbivores. Transfer to larger cages if necessary. 
Try to collect older larvae that will quickly pupate. 
Parasites will also emerge from egg masses, larvae 
and pupae. 
2. Simple Cages can be made using was te materials 
such as transparent glass or plastic bottles. Place 
leaves and stems in the bottles with insects and 
cover with netting. For soft drink bottles, place a 
bouquet of stems and leaves in the bottle and cover 
with large plastic bag. For seedlings,  invert the 
plastic bottles which have one end open and other 
end covered with netting material. 
3. Field Cages  are useful to cover infestations of 
large larvae, hoppers, and other insects. Make cages 
from large plastic bags, or netting materials. Use 
bamboo sticks to hold the cages above the plant. 
 
4. Potted plants and Cages  is useful especially for 
demonstrations and exhibitions. Grow your own 
plant in the pot, or transplant from field grown 
plants. For cages use netting suspended strings or 
frames, or use plastic bags with netting glued over 
one end. Expensive thick stiff plastic is also very 
useful. 
5. Be Creative! It is surprising where insects can be 
reared. Use discarded cans for pots, and transparent 
plastic bottles for cages. Clear glass jars and small 
plastic containers will suffice for most needs. 
Rearing Tips for Specific Insects 
These are only tips. You can probably improve on 
all of them. 
1. Plant hoppers: Place at least 3 male and female 
pairs in cages on young (30 -40 HSS) plants. Allow 
mating a nd egg laying. After nymphs emerge (8 
days after egg laying) remove excess nymphs to 
other plants when the nymphs are in the second 
instars. If the plant becomes brown, move the 
nymphs to new green and healthy plants. 
Alternative method is to place hoppers  in cages on 
plants in the field. Be sure all natural enemies have 
been removed first. 
 
  
BPH eggs BPH 
2.  Stem borers : Collect adult moths in the field 
using hands or sweet net. The best way to collect is 
with a bottle so that the moth is not damaged. Pl ace 
the moths that look alike in cages on plants. 
Observe the egg laying. Wait for emergence of the 
first instars from the egg. 
3.  Leaf folders : Collect adult moths in the field 
using hands or a sweep net. The best way to collect 
the moths is with a bottl e so that the moths are not 
injured. Place many leaf folder moths in cages on 
young plants. Observe egg laying and wait for 
emergence of the first instars from the eggs. 
4.  Rice bugs: Collect nymphs and adults from the 
rice field. Place the insects on old er plants in the 
milky stage. Observe feeding and egg laying. 
5.  Other larvae : Collect larva in the field. Old 
larvae are easiest to rear to adult. Place the larvae in 
cages on plants of the same age as those in the field. 
If the plant is consumed quickly , move the larva to 
a new plant. Observe pupation and adult 
emergence. 
6.  Hunting spiders: Collect hunting spiders in the 
field. Place in cages with or without plants. To 
demonstrate feeding, do not feed the insects for at 
least one day before demonstrati on. On the day of 
demonstration, place several types of insects from 
the rice field in the cage. To show the number of 
hoppers eaten in a day, place many hoppers in the 
cage (count them first) then leave for one day. 
Count the remaining hoppers the next day. 
7.  Web-making spiders : Collect web -making 
spiders in the field and place in cages on older 
plants so the spider can make a web. Observe web -
making. After the web is made, place a moth in the 
cage and observe the results. 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
31 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
 
8.  Larva and adult ladybeet les: Collect larva and 
adult ladybeetles and place in cages with or without 
plants. Place young hoppers in the cage to observe 
feeding. 
9. Stem borer egg mass parasites : Collect egg 
masses in the field. Place in small plastic bottles. 
Wait and observe emer gence of parasites or first 
instars. 
 
 
10. Leaf folder parasites : Collect older parasitized 
leaf folder larvae and place in plastic pot. Wait for 
emergence of parasites. 
11. Caterpillar parasites: Collect older parasitized 
larvae and place in plastic pot.  Wait for emergence 
of parasites. 
12. Parasite pupae : Collect parasite pupae 
(especially Apantles) and place in plastic pot. Wait 
for emergence of parasites 
 
Life Cycles and Food Webs 
Introduction 
Life Cycles of plants, insects and natural 
enemies are well  known to us. The development 
from egg or seed to adult insect, spider or plant has 
been seen in the field and in the Insect Zoo. 
Food Chains are the interactions between plants, 
herbivores and natural enemies of the herbivores. 
The energy from one level of the ecosystem (plants) 
moves to another level (herbivore) along a chain of 
interaction. 
As a trainer working with farmers, you must 
begin to integrate these two motions together into a 
smooth acting dynamic ecosystem. Seeds germinate 
to be eaten by insec ts that lay eggs that are 
parasitized....for example. Every life cycle is part of 
a food chain. 
In this exercise, you will have to put the two 
systems together so that they are functional. This 
will help you to understand that interactions have a 
time frame. For example; the life cycle of hoppers 
(brown, white-back, and green) all begin with a egg 
stage inside the plant. In the next stage, the nymphs 
feed on the stem or leave by sucking. Finally adults 
mate and lay eggs on the same plant or migrate to 
other fields. During each stage, different natural 
enemies attack the hoppers. During the egg stage, 
parasites complete their own egg/larva/pupa/adult 
in the hopper eggs and kill the eggs, and mirid bug 
predators suck on the eggs. During the nymphal and 
adult s tage, hunting spiders, water striders, lady 
beetles, and other predators feed on the hoppers. 
Parasites live on the nymphs until nymphs are 
adults. Web-spinning spiders feed on flying hoppers 
as the move in the field. 
This combination of interacting life c ycles of 
the plant, hoppers, and natural enemies is a good 
view of the dynamic system of the rice field. It 
shows also that balance is needed in the system to 
make each life -cycle possible; for example, a 
spiders life cycle depends on the hopper. If there 
are no hoppers then there will be no spiders to 
protect the feed. In this system, insects such as 
hoppers at low population are actually very 
beneficial to the farmer because they are spider 
food, and spiders are what protect the field from 
large population changes. Did you ever think that a 
hopper might be a beneficial insect to the farmer? It 
all depends on how many are in the field. This can 
be explained now by looking at how the system 
interacts. 
For this exercise, you will have to integrate 
much of you r knowledge into a big picture. It will 
not be easy to put the pieces together Also for this 
exercise you should think in terms of "guilds". 
Guilds are group organisms that have similar types 
of life cycles and share food sources and are usually 
attacked by the same natural enemies. Hoppers are 
one example above. The many species of stem 
borers are another guild. Hunting spiders includes 
many species that hunt in a similar way and have 
similar prey. Try to use major guilds for this 
exercise than individual species. 
Objective 
After this activity you should be able to explain the 
interaction of the ecosystem factors using both life 
cycles and food chains for at least one guild of 
insect pests. 
Time required = 120 minutes. 
Materials 
Paper, pens, pastels, IPM TEXTBOOK 
Procedure 
1.  Each group should choose a guild to analyze; 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
32 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 Hoppers, stem borers, leaf folders, leaf feeding 
caterpillars, caseworms, black and other bugs, rice 
bugs, gall midge, rats. 
2. Draw a large circle and write in the general 
stages for insects of the guild around the circle (see 
example below). 
3. On one side make a list of the stages of the 
insects in one column. In the next column, make a 
list of natural enemies (by guild) which attack each 
stage. 
4. On the drawing, draw a circle for each n atural 
enemy which attacks a particular stage of the insect. 
On the natural enemy circle, write the stages of the 
natural enemy's life cycle. If their are natural 
enemies of the natural enemies (example, a spider 
that eats another spider) then make a third  level of 
circles for these natural enemies. (USE YOUR 
TEXTBOOK TO GET MORE INFORMATION). 
5. After finishing the diagram, do a short role play 
with another group. One group IPM experts is 
advising another group of farmers about the insect 
that was chosen. The group of IPM experts is very 
smart and they know that asking questions and 
making discussion is better than giving simple 
answers. So the IPM experts begin a process of 
discussing with farmers about the life cycle of the 
pest insect. (Most farmers know  this, but farmers 
like to talk. Let them talk as much as they like by 
asking questions). 
Next, the groups of IPM experts begin to ask 
about the natural enemies of each stage. Many 
farmers know this, but the IPM experts may have to 
help them by giving hint s. (Example: What about 
parasites?) 
Work through the whole life cycle. 
6. Change roles for each group and repeat the 
activity. 
7. Ask the following questions: 
a. What would happen to natural enemies if there 
are no insect pests? 
b. Do you think insect pest s can be beneficial if at 
low populations? Why are they important? 
c. In the system, what will happen if you spray 
broad-spectrum pesticides?  
 
Toxic Compound (Pesticides) Related Issues:  
Poisons in Agriculture 
 
 
Introduction 
Pesticides are necessary to in some fields, in 
some years in areas. In many seasons, many rice 
fields do not need pesticides. Pesticides are poisons. 
They are very dangerous to both the person who 
uses the pesticides and to those that are living or 
playing near the fields where pesti cides are used. 
These poisons kill aquatic animals (fish and frogs), 
beneficial predators and parasites, and other 
beneficial animals such a pollinating bees. There is 
no use of pesticides that can be called "safe" to 
everything in the ecosystem. Even the very 
selective insecticide, Applaud, causes problems for 
the growth of shrimp and prawns. There is no "safe 
use of pesticides". We can only avoid their use and 
reduce exposure when used. 
Predators, parasites, pathogens, resistant varieties, 
growing a healt hy crop, and proper monitoring of 
the fields are methods to reduce the population 
growth of potentially harmful insects and rats. 
Pesticides are not the "last method" to use as 
commonly thought. They must be integrated with 
other aspects. Seed treatments a re a good example 
of how pesticides are used before other methods, 
but used in a way which reduces their impact on 
natural enemies, on the environment and human 
health. In general, pesticides should be used as a 
"last method" because they do have many bad 
effects and are expensive in terms of actual "out -of-
pocket" costs. 
When pesticides are needed to reduce economic 
losses by insects, they should be used correctly and 
carefully. The first step is to know the area to be 
sprayed, and the proper amounts. Care  should be 
taken in measurement and handling of pesticides. 
The second step is the actual application of sprays 
in the field. Proper protection is needed in field 
application and possible with simple adaptation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
33 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Poisons in Agriculture: Health Aspects 
 
 
 
Introduction 
Pesticides are poisons which cause 
physiological changes that result in the death of 
insects and other organisms such as humans. Most 
pesticides attack the nervous system of organisms, 
both invertebrates (insects, spiders, etc.) and 
vertebrates (fish, frogs, people, etc.). The 
carbamates and organophosphates both interfere 
with the correct transmission of nerve pulses. The 
action of interference can be the result of a high 
single dose (common in suicide by insecticides), or 
over a long per iod such as in farmers and children 
working and playing in fields with pesticide 
applications. 
How are the poisonous effects of insecticides 
measured? There are many types of studies done 
before a pesticide may become registered for 
general usage. Some of the tests are the effects of 
chemicals on skin, on eyesight, and on moist tissues 
such as lungs. There are also tests to see how much 
pesticide is needed to kill insects, and mammals. 
For most of these tests, rats and rabbits are used in 
large numbers. For  example, insecticide is sprayed 
in the eyes of these animals and the reactions are 
noted. 
Test on the dosage of insecticide which kills 
test animals are called Lethal Dosage tests. 
Basically the process is simple and depends on the 
fact that not all anima ls will die with the same 
dosage because some individuals are more sensitive 
than others. If a very low dose is applied to 100 
individuals, only a few individuals will die. If a 
very high dose is given, then most of the 100 
individuals will die. The dose a t which 50 of the 
100 (50%) die is called the 50% lethal dosage or 
LD50. The dosage at which 90 of the 100 
individuals (90%) die is called the LD90. This is a 
moderately useful measure, except that even at low 
dosages there is still an LD10 in which 10% di e. 
What does this 10% probability mean in another 
example? It means that there is a probability that for 
every 10 people that cross the road, one will die 
while crossing the road. In other words, 10% 
probability is still very high. Dosage for mammal is 
usually measured in mg/kg. This means that a LD50 
of 1 mg/kg (the oral LD50 for Temik) for a person 
who weighs 50 kg is about 50mg, which is a very 
small quantity. Lethal dosages are usually given in 
both oral (through the mouth) and dermal (exposure 
to skin) levels.  
But pesticides cause other effects besides death. 
Other symptoms of pesticide exposure include 
nausea, dizziness, headaches, fatigue, and diarrhea, 
irritation of nose, eyes, and throat. Recognition of 
these effects is an important part of pestici de safety 
and in your job as an IPM field expert. These and 
other effects of pesticide exposure will be explored 
in this activity with demonstration of pesticide 
effects on animals. 
 
 Natural enemies are usually more susceptible to 
insecticide that pests be cause natural enemies 
usually do not build up resistance. What 
happens when a low dosage is applied to the 
field (i.e. a dosage that is LD 50 for BPH, but 
LD90 for natural enemies)? Poisoning 
Symptoms 
 Use the following list. Go through the list and 
check an y symptoms you have seen or about 
which farmers complain. 
 After spraying have you are had the following 
symptoms immediately or within a few days: 
 Mild symptoms 
 Irritation of eye, nose, or throat   
 Headache 
 Dizziness 
 Fatigue 
 Diarrhea 
 Moderate symptoms 
 Redness or itching skin 
 Upset stomach 
 Blurred vision 
 Extreme weakness  
 Excessive perspiration 
 Rapid heartbeat 
 Severe symptoms 
 Pinpoint pupils 
 Difficulty in breathing 
 Unconsciousness 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
34 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
Effects on pesticide exposure. 
 
PESTICIDES 
 A major problem of pesticides is  their effect on 
"non-target organisms". Most pesticides are very 
toxic to predators, parasites, fish, and people who 
come into contact with these chemicals.  
For other types of insects there are other pesticides. 
A major new pesticide is Bacillus thurengi ensis 
usually called "Bt". This insecticide is active 
against most Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths). 
The insecticide must be consumed while most 
insecticides only need contact. Also the insect does 
not die as quickly after eating Bt than when sprayed 
by a broad spectrum insecticide. In this activity, we 
will look at a selective pesticide and compare with a 
typical broad spectrum pesticide. 
 
 
Objective 
Demonstrate the difference between selective and 
broad spectrum pesticides. 
 
Materials 
Plastic bags 
Spiders and caterpillars collected from the field 
Small fish, and plastic buckets 
Monocrotofos and Bacillus thurengiensis 
Cups, netting, rubber bands and sprayer 
 
Steps 
1.Collect caterpillars, spiders and other natural 
enemies from the field. Keep the caterpil lars on 
soybean plants so that they don't die. The plants 
should have the roots so there are enough leaves for 
the insects to live on for two days. 
2.Place the natural enemies in two cups and over 
with netting. 
3.Place the caterpillars on the plants in cup s with 
water. Prepare two cups. 
4.Place fish in two plastic containers. 
5.Prepare monocrotofos in hand sprayers and Bt. in 
another hand sprayer. Use typical field dosage (1 -2 
ml/I) 
6.Spray one of the cups containing natural enemies 
with monocrotofos and one cup containing enemies 
with Bt. 
7.Spray one of the cups with caterpillars with 
monocrotofos and the other with Bt. 
8.Spray one of the plastic containers of fish with 
monocrotofos, and one with Bt. 
9.Observe the results after one hour and after one 
day. If the larvae haven't died in one day, observe 
again after another day. 
 
Discussion questions 
10. What are the results of the treatments? Prepare a 
table for presentation of results. 
11.Why are selective pesticides useful for 
secondary crops? Why is it impo rtant to use 
selective pesticides? 
 
Carbofuran, Carbamate Spray and Spiders 
"Systemic" pesticides are those pesticides that 
are absorbed by the plant and the pesticide is able to 
move through the plant through the network of 
plant vessels. It is commonly s aid that systemic 
pesticides are safe for natural enemies because they 
compounds are in the soil and in the plant. But how 
do the pesticides finally get into the soil? Where is 
carbofuran broadcast? Is there any difference in the 
application of granular ca rbofuran and liquid 
sprays? 
In this activity we will look at the effect of 
carbofuran on spiders. The effect will be compared 
with a neutral control and a sprayed BPMC. 
 
Objective 
Demonstrate the effects of carbofuran on natural 
enemies. 
 
Time required = 120 minutes. 
 
Materials 
Plastic bags, 3 cups, netting for the cups, 3 
rubber bands, water, carbofuran, liquid carbamate 
(eg. BPMC), natural enemies, hand sprayer (1 liter 
for indoor plants), pencil and paper. (Try also some 
herbicides, and fungicides). 
 
Procedure 
1. Go to the field with plastic bags. Collect spiders 
and predatory beetles. 
2. Return to a shady place. Set up three cups with 
the names "carbofuran", "carbamate", and "control" 
written on them. Add water so the cup is half -full. 
In the cup for "ca rbofuran" add a small amount 
(two pinches) of carbofuran to the water and mix so 
the carbofuran begins to be dissolved. 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
35 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
3. Now in each of the cups, add the same number 
and same kind of natural enemies. Cover the cups 
with netting and rubber bands. 
4. In the cup labeled "carbamate", spray the inside 
with the hand sprayer. The concentration and 
dosage should be the same as in the field. 
5. Watch all three cups for changes in activity or 
death of natural enemies. Record the time of 
activity changes and deaths over 45 minutes. 
6. What happened? How did the natural enemies in 
the control compare with the other treatments? Why 
did natural enemies die in the carbofuran treatment? 
Do spiders and beetles walk on the water in the 
field? What is the significance of a b asal 
application of carbofuran? 
7. Present your results and answers to the above 
questions to the other groups. 
 
Spraying  
Spraying pesticides is dangerous. The compounds 
used for spraying are in a concentrated form which 
makes them even more dangerous tha n usual 
exposure. Concentrated liquids direct from the 
bottle, and exposure to sprays in the field during 
application will cause numerous symptoms such as 
skin rashes, dizziness, nausea, and headaches. 
The usual recommendation for gloves, boots, 
rain cloth s, and respirator are impossible to 
implement for most farmers because of the cost. 
But all these articles can be substituted; plastic bags 
for gloves and boots, large plastic sheet cut like a 
rain poncho or apron, a hat and cloth for the nose 
and mouth. 
The direction and velocity of the wind should 
be considered when spraying. If the wind is 
blowing hard, do not spray! Your chemical will 
never reach most of the plant. Never walk into the 
wind when spraying. Always walk at a 90o angle to 
the wind. 
Remember that when you broadcast carbofuran 
in the water, you are walking in a soup of water and 
dissolved carbofuran. 
In this activity, you will see the result of spraying in 
the field. 
 
 
 
Objective 
Demonstrate simple adaptations to reduce 
exposure to poisons. 
Time required = 120 minutes. 
Materials: sprayer, bucket, red batik dye, white 
pants and shirt. 
Procedure (for group of five) 
1. Go to the field. One person in the group should 
put on the white pants and shirt. Four other 
members should make notes on what the  first 
person is doing. Note especially how to make 
reduce exposure to the spray liquid. 
2. Fill the tank with water. Add red batik dye. Add 
a lot so that the water is very red. Close the tank 
and shake the tank to mix the water and dye. 
3. Now spray 500 meter square of the field with the 
tank of water. Others should measure the time 
required and observe the spraying. 
4. After finished spraying, empty an excess spray. 
5. Now observe the sprayer. Is the red dye on the 
skin or clothing of the person who spray ed? What 
could be done to reduce the exposure? What would 
happen to the person if the liquid was a real 
pesticide and the farmer used his regular spraying 
clothes? 
6.  Present you observations, discussion and 
clothing to the other groups. Discuss "Is there really 
'safe application' of pesticides?” 
 
Ice-Breakers, Energizers and Team Building 
Exercises 
 Ice Breakers 
 Energizers 
 Team fun 
 Team skills 
Introduction 
Facilitators should build up a repertoire of 
activities that can used for interesting opening that 
help participants to become comfortable with each 
other ("Ice Breakers"), activities that boost the 
energy level of the group after visiting the field or 
after a break ("Energizers"), activities that are just 
fun to do in groups and make getting together a 
better time ("Team Fun"), and activities that build 
team capacity through learning techniques for 
planning, organizing, and action ("Team Skills"). 
The term "Team" is used here to emphasize that a 
group need to work together with common goals for 
common int erests and that teams often have 
structure. There are coaches, captains, and players 
with various positions. No team can work well 
without each team member, and the team succeeds 
more often when everyone works together while 
each improves individual skills and commitment. 
During the cycle of the FFS over one season, 
energizers and team fun might be used more at the 
beginning of the season, with more emphasis on 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
36 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Team Skills near the end of the season, especially 
in preparation for community organizing. 
Remember that training should be enjoyable for 
the facilitator and FFS members. Ask members of 
the group to lead other activities like warming up 
exercises at the beginning of each meeting, or other 
activity that they may have learned at another 
training program. 
 
Ice Breakers 
 Introduce neighbor 
 Expectation picture 
 Throw a ball 
 Name memorization in circle 
 Money under chair 
 Air numbering 
 
 Energizers 
 Coconut and other songs 
 Group words (boy - hmmm, girl - clap, cow - 
stomp) 
 Parasite (pen in bottle) 
 Ballons on leg 
 Number on paper (practice makes perfect) 
 20 questions 
 Give characteristics game 
 
Team Fun 
 Water passing 
 Broken squares 
 Strings 
 
Energizers 
 Mini-tower and bridge (leadership style) 
 Message passing (communication) 
 
Farmer Field School- Follow-up Activities 
The following is a short list of activities. The 
possibilities are numerous, but will require action 
on the part of facilitators and the group they get 
organized. 
Farmers' Planning Meetings  are one step 
towards farmers determining what type of follow -
up ac tivities is appropriate to their interest, time 
availability, and funding situation. The planning 
meeting should try to assess the common problems 
the members are facing, and establish goals towards 
which to work. Work plans and success criteria 
should als o be developed, although these will 
usually have to be undertaken at a second meeting 
established specifically for that purpose. 
Farmer to Farmer FFS  
Problem Specific Field Labs  
IPM Clubs: ARE to carry out follow -up activities. 
The Clubs usually focused on non -IPM problems, 
but often related to agriculture. Like many 
organizations, the name merely reflects its history 
and not its focus. The Clubs have officers, local 
budgets, and action plans. 
IPM Labeling of crops 
IPM Villages 
FFS that focus on developin g a block of IPM 
fields with lower pesticide inputs 
IPM Trainer Association:  
Trainers make a newsletter and sent it among 
themselves for reading and comparison of efforts 
with their self -proclaimed goal of training at least 
four FFS each year. Personal op inions and 
information, research results, and progress reports 
are included in the newsletter. 
"Entering Pesticide Free Zone"  
This would be a title displayed along the side of 
the road as one travels into an area where IPM has 
advanced to the point where pesticides have been 
replaced with non -pesticide plant protection 
methods,  
 
Training Evaluation  
There are numerous ways for a facilitator to 
evaluate the progress of one training season, but 
four methods that have been widely used are 
explained below. 
Ballot Box evaluations are field based methods 
that use real specimens and field situations to test 
field abilities. The Ballot Box test should be given 
before and after training with levels of difficulty 
that are the same. The questions on the test should 
be developed before the beginning of the season 
and relate to the core objectives of the course. 
Questions should focus on; 
 agronomic practices and plant compensation 
 recognition of pests, natural enemies, diseases 
 recognition of damage from pests, diseases , 
rats, and birds 
 management of pests, diseases, rats, and birds 
 other areas covered in the course 
The mechanism of the test is to write a question 
on a thick paper board and mount it on a stick in the 
field. Questions should be multiple choices. The 
board and stick are placed like a sign in the field 
next to a real condition or object that is being asked 
about in the question. For example: 
1. What caused this damage? 
A) Stem borer 
 B) Rats 
C) Tungro 
The sign should have a string connecting the 
sign to the plant part showing the damage. The 
participant will then mark A, B, C on the answer 
sheet for question one. Alternatively, each farmer is 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
37 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
given many small pieces of paper (Ballots) with the 
same number specific for him or her. On the small 
containers(ballot box) marked A to C the farmer 
can put in their Ballots. If the correct answer is A, 
then the person puts their number in the A 
container. 
Twenty to thirty questions should be prepared 
for the test. After everyone has taken the test, the 
facilitator shoul d walk with the group to each 
question and determine the correct answer. If the 
question or answer is not clear, the group or 
facilitator may decide to discard the question. 
Written Exams can also be used together with 
the Ballot Box. Of course it is important to consider 
the literacy level of the group, and the knowledge 
of names or technical terms. The names used in one 
village, may not be the officially accepted names 
nationally and this can lead to confusion. Written 
tests must be tested for clarity bef orehand, and 
checked to ensure local applicability. Remember 
that knowing the name of something is not 
important for field management, but knowing it's 
function and ecological attributes is important. 
Don't be academic about names. Also don't be 
academic a bout definitions. Be practical and keep 
tests focused on real issues, skills, and knowledge. 
Give the test before and after training. After the 
test, always review together to determine the 
correct answer. Discard unclear questions. 
Field Walks  are the bes t evaluation method 
because there is time to clarify questions and 
answers. Field Walks are basically walking in the 
field in pairs (facilitator and farmer) with a 
predetermined list of questions. The facilitator 
should have already prepared questions, and  know 
parts of the fields where the questions can be used. 
Questions will be similar to the Ballot Box. The list 
of questions should not change significantly 
between persons and from the beginning and end of 
training.  
A few do not do's also: 
 Do not use pictures (photographs or drawings). 
 Do not assume the name of something is the 
same everywhere. 
 Do not assume anyone knows the nationally 
accepted proper name. 
 Do not use Latin names whenever local names 
are available. 
 Do not assume your question is very clear (they 
never are!). 
 
Quality Checklist 
The following questions can be used to assist an 
observer in examining the quality of IPM training 
in all IPM training contexts. These questions 
identify the key points in an IPM activity that must 
be present if the quality of the process of training is 
to be maintained. While most of these questions can 
be answered by "yes" or "no", don't stop there. 
Explain why you answered "yes" or "no". This 
checklist can also be of used as an outline for 
reports on IPM training. 
"What's this?" 
1. Are questions answered by further probing or 
leading questions? 
2. Do probing questions concern functional 
relationships in the agro ecosystem? 
3. Are participants able to define functional 
relationships in the agro ecosystem? 
Agro ecosystem Activity 
1. Before the activity begins are participants told 
the goal of the activity and the process to be 
followed in the activity? 
2. During observation do participants get into the 
field? 
3. Do participants look at all parts of the plant as 
part of their observation activity? 
4. Do participants note down what they find? 
5. Do participants collect specimens? 
6. Are observations summarized in the agro 
ecosystem drawings? 
7. Does the leader pose problems, ask questions 
relevant to the drawings, or use  the list of questions 
in the Field Guides to encourage participant 
analysis of the drawings? 
8. Does discussion take place concerning field 
conditions? 
9. Are "what if" scenarios posed by the leader and 
discussed by the participants? 
10. Are previous week ’s agro ecosystem drawings 
used for comparisons to the situation this week? 
11. Are field management decisions taken and 
critically examined before acceptance? 
12. Are other factors considered in addition to the 
economic threshold in decision making around  
control issues? 
13. Are participants active and working together in 
the small groups? 
14. Can participants state the difference between 
pests and natural enemies? 
15. Are decisions based on levels of insect 
populations and analysis of their functional 
relationships in the rice field? 
16. Does the leader, by means of questions, help the 
participants to analyze the activity and what they 
have learned? 
 
Special Topics 
1. Before the activity does the leader explain the 
goal and process of the activity? 
2. During the activity are participants involved and 
active? 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
38 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
3. Are group activities dominated by one 
individual? 
4. Can participants present results stating or 
summarizing what has happened and why? 
5. Can participants state what they have learned 
from the activity? 
6. Does the leader ask open ended questions to: 
help participants examine what happened during the 
activity; generalize from the activity; apply what 
they learned to "real life"? 
 
Group Dynamics 
1. Before activity does the leader tell participants 
the goal and process of the activity? 
2. Are all participants involved in the activity? 
3. Does the leader ask open ended questions to: 
help participants examine what happened during the 
activity; generalize from the activity; apply what 
they learned to "real life"? 
 
Ballot Box 
1. Does the "ballot box" test field based 
knowledge? 
2. "Ballot box" questions should not have Latin 
names, but are they still used? 
3. Does the leader use the "ballot box" as a learning 
reinforcement tool by reviewing each item with th e 
participants? 
 
 
Evaluation of training impact 
 Economic benefits 
 Environment and health benefits 
 Community organization and self-funding 
 
Economic benefits 
The most sought after measures of FFS impact 
by those that paid for the FFS. The investment in 
training is usually expected to produce some 
political good will, but moreover, should increase 
economic benefits to the farmer and community, 
and eventually the nation. The major factors to be 
measured are inputs such as pesticides, time and 
labor, fertilize r, water use and equipment. Other 
benefits should also be considered such as higher 
rice prices for low or no spray crops that may be 
obtained with special labeling or improved soil 
fertility in cases where organic material is built up 
in the soil using IP M methods (green manure or 
compost). Such economic evaluations could be 
done on a seasonal or annual basis with IPM trained 
farmers to see long term impact. 
Environment and health benefits  may accrue 
with implementation of IPM. Fewer pesticides and 
less to xic pesticides use is a common outcome of 
beginning field observation and IPM methods. 
Measuring these benefits is not easy; however, a 
few indicators may be used. For environment, the 
occurrence of more natural enemies, or other wild 
life may be considered. 
For health, immediate benefits can be measured by 
counting such indicators as lost work days, 
stomachaches, headaches, visits to local clinics for 
post-pesticide treatment ills, and other common 
illness related to pesticide exposure. A baseline 
should be made be measures before training at one 
season or more. It is important to separate crops: 
some farmers continue to spray heavily on some 
crops while reducing sprays.  
Community Organization and Self-Funding can 
also be evaluated, and is one of the impor tant goals 
of organizing the FFS through SLTP. Community 
organizations may continue to pursue IPM 
activities, but if the FFS group gets organized to 
take on other issues, like setting up of bio control 
lab through self funding, then the impact of the FFS 
will be much greater 
  
  
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
39 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
(Annexure-I) 
Requirements of essential stationery and field 
materials for SLTP 
 
Sl.No. Materials Quantity 
1 Colour chart papers 100 
2 White news paper print roll 10 
3 File covers 100 
4 File tag(Bundles) 10 
5 Xerox paper 10 bundles 
6 Permanent marker pens 50 
7 Sketch pen sets 20 
8 OHP sheets 50 
9 Foot scale 10 
10 Micro tip pens 10 
11 Punching machines 6 
12 Staplers 6 
13 Stamp pad 2 
14 Cello tapes 12 
15 Small thread balls 6 
16 Needles 10 
17 Scribbling pads 60 
18 Ball pens 30 
19 Fevisticks 10 
20 Gum bottles 6 
21 Plastic pouches 10 
22 Rubber band bundles 10 
23 Medium cotton rolls 10 
24 Gem clip boxes 6 
25 Drawing pin boxes 6 
26 Colour film rolls 6 
27 Chloroform 500 ml 6 
28 Mosquito net cloth 20 meters. 
29 
29 Thermocol sheets 10 
30 Bamboo sticks 200 
 
(Annexure-II) 
Allocation of additional duties and responsibilities 
to resource persons 
 
Sl. 
No 
Designation Additional duties 
1 General 
coordinator 
Providing transport to entire 
training activities 
Reception and i ntroduction 
of floating resource persons 
Bill settlement and 
correspondence  
2 Technical 
coordinator 
Providing information on 
every day field activities 
Procurement, supply and 
mobilization of every day 
field materials to trainees 
and resource persons 
3 Resource 
persons-! 
Looking after 
accommodation, food and 
refreshment  
Timely supply of food and 
refreshment 
4 Resource 
person-II 
Taking care of class room 
facilities 
Arrangement of audio visual 
aids 
Daily attendance 
Duplication of training 
materials and distribution 
5 Resource 
person-III 
Recording daily training 
activities and submitting 
reports to General co -
coordinator 
Co-coordinating with 
inauguration and valedictory 
committee  
6 Resource 
person IV 
Providing medical and 
recreation facilities 
Arrangements for photos. 
Video coverage of training 
activities 
7 Resource 
person V 
Providing reception and 
accommodation to floating 
resource persons 
Attending to emergency 
activities arising during the 
training programme 
*Supporting staff will assist the resource persons. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
40 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
(Annexure-III) 
Profile /Bio data of Participants 
 
Name  
Date of birth  
Qualifications  
Experience  
Present official address  
Phone number and 
address of participant 
controlling offer 
 
Home address  
Address and phone 
number of perso n to be 
contacted in the event of 
emergency 
 
Place: 
Date: 
Signature with date 
 
 
(Annexure-IV) 
Attendance sheet for participants 
 
Date: 
Sl.No Name Signature with date 
   
  
Counter signed: General Co-ordinator 
 
(Annexure-V) 
Attendance sheet for Resource persons 
 
Sl.No Name Signature with date 
   
 
 Counter signed: General Co-ordinator 
 
 
Attendance sheet for supporting staff 
Annexure VI 
Sl.No Name Signature with 
date 
   
 Counter signed: General Co-ordinator 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (Annexure-VII) 
Certificate for participants 
Certificate Model 
Government emblem 
Certificate 
 
This is to certify that 
Shri/Smt……………………………………………
……………………………………….. has 
successfully completed the season long training 
programme in Cotton IPM progamme held at -------
------- --------- --------- ---------- --------- -------------- 
from --------- ------------- to ---------- ------------- 
 
Plant Protection Advisor  
Government of India 
Director of Agriculture 
Government of ----------
- 
 
….(Annexure-VIII) 
Certificate Model 
Certificate for Resource person  
Government emblem 
Certificate 
 
Shri/Smt……………………………………………
…… ……… ……… …………… …….. has 
participated has resource person in the season long 
training programme in Cotton IPM progamme held 
at ---------------------------------------------------- from-
------ --------- to ----------- ----------- ----------- 
 
Plant Protection Advisor  
Government of India 
Director of Agriculture 
Government of ----------
- 
 
(Annexure- IX) 
 
Certificate for Farmer for attending to FFS 
Farmers field school Certificate (in local 
language) 
 
This is to certify that Shri/smt. ------------------------ 
Son/daughter of --------- --------- ----------- --------- 
Participated in the Farmers field school programme 
conducted during ------------- at --------------- village 
organized by-----------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------- 
Astt. Director of Agri. 
Government of ----------- 
Assistant Director/ 
Plant Protection Officer 
CIPMC ------------- 
 
 
     
 
 
CBG-IPM: FFS, HRD, OTP, SLTP 
 
41 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Base line survey format for FFS 
 
Crop   Season  Year 
  
Sl.No Particulars 
1 Name of the Farmer & Contact Number 
2 Village :____Block:____ District:______ 
3 Farm Area (In Hectares)  Type of soil 
4 Type of Irrigation:___ Crop & variety:_____ 
5 Gross yield for 1 hectare (last cropping season) 
(in Kgs.) 
6 Key Insect pests observed during last season 
7 Minor insect pests observed during last season 
8 Major Diseases observed during last season 
9 Known natural enemies of crop 
10 Cultural pest control practices adopted 
11 Major pesticides used & against pests 
12 Type of sprayer used  
13 Size of sprayer(in litres) used 
14 Any Bio-pesticide/Botanical spray used 
15 Number of tank loads used per hectare 
16 Number of spraying operations per cropping 
season 
17 Granular pesticides used (Kg/ha) 
18 Wettable powders used (Kg/ha.) 
19 Seed rate used per ha 
20 Do you use cocktail type of pesticide 
21 Cost of seeds used per ha.  
22 Cost of seedbed preparation  
23 Cost of land preparation per ha.  
24 Cost of transplanting per hectare 
25 Irrigation cost per hectare per cropping season 
26 Labour costs for hand weeding/spraying of 
herbicide/day/hectare 
27 Interest for crop loan/hectare 
28 Fertilizer used No. of bags Cost of one bag 
Total cost 
29 Labour cost for application of fertilizer /hectare 
30 No. & cost of liquid pesticide (EC) used/ hectare 
31 No. & cost of wettable powder used / hectare 
32 No. & cost of granular pesticides used/ hectare 
33 Labour cost for spraying of pesticides 
34 Any other expenses incurred for plant protection 
measures 
35 Rate of produce sold (price 
36 Yield obtained 
37 Profit (last season) 
  
   
 Signature FFS in charge 
 
 Season Long Training Programme  
Table of contents  
Sl. 
No 
Contents 
1 Introduction 
2 Objectives of SLTP 
3 Components of SLTP 
4 Major heads- expenditure for SLTP 
5 Role of co -coordinators and resource persons 
during SLTP 
6 Essential elements required for SLTP 
7 SLTP field guide 
Principles of IPM 
Basic concepts and assumptions 
ETL vs. AESA 
Course contents 
8 Significant activities of SLTP 
Crop physiology 
Agro-ecosystem analysis 
Participatory action research 
Special topics 
Non-Formal education 
Course evaluation 
9 Activities in details 
Participatory action research experiments 
Classical IPM field studies. 
Weekly schedule 
FFS activities-Practice sessions 
Disease specimens and insect collections 
Crop physiology experiments 
Disease management 
Weeds management 
Population dynamics of rodents 
Insect zoo 
Life cycle and food webs 
Poison in agriculture 
Team building exercises 
FFS follow up activities 
Training evaluation for participants 
Quality check list 
Self evaluation matrix for facilitators 
Training impact 
10 Annexure (I to X) 
Annexure. I  
Essential stationary items required for SLTP 
Annexure. II 
Duties and responsibilities assigned to facilitators 
Annexure.III 
Profile of participants 
Annexure.IV 
Attendance sheet for participants 
Annexure. V 
Attendance sheet for resource persons 
Annexure.VI 
Attendance sheet for supporting staff 
Annexure. VII 
Certificate format for participants 
Annexure. VIII 
Certificate format for facilitators 
Annexure. IX 
certificate format for FFS farmers 
Annexure. X 
Base line survey format for FFS 
  
 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
42 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
CONSERVATION & AUGMENTATION OF 
BIO-CONTROL AGENTS 
 
 Introduction: Eco-system consists of both 
biotic and abiotic factors which contribute to 
sustain the ecosystem. The optimum abiotic 
conditions help to survive the biotic fauna and flora 
in proper way in the ecosystem. Slight or extreme 
variations in the abiotic conditions lead adverse 
effect on the survival of existing flora and fauna of 
an ecosystem. Both natural and manmade 
interference in the ecosystem also put adverse 
impact on biotic components of ec osystem. Hence, 
for the better survival of flora and fauna it is very 
essential to maintain the abiotic and biotic factors 
better suited for their survival. Keeping in the view 
the above facts, the conservation of bio -control 
agents can be defined as follows-  
“To make environment better suited for bio -
control agents or natural enemies of crop pests and 
weeds is called as conservation of bio -control 
agents” 
“The removal of those cultural practices which 
are harmful for the buildup of natural enemies of 
crop pests and weeds (bio -control agents) is called 
as conservation of bio-control agents” 
“To preserve, Protect and Promote the 
abundance of organisms that may keep the 
abundance of harmful organisms (pests) under 
check.” 
In ecosystem both biotic and abiotic factors are 
interdependent on each other even different biotic 
factors i.e fauna and flora are interdependent on 
each other. They also have competition among 
themselves in form of antibiosis and symbiosis. 
Parasitism, predation and hyper -parasitism are the  
means of their dependency hence, for the survival 
and conservation of bio -control agents there has to 
be safety devices from their hyper parasitoids or 
predators. A parasitoid and predator must be host 
specific as extent as possible and should not be 
affected with their hyper parasitoids prevailing in 
that particular area. Keeping in the view the above 
we must manipulate the habitat of bio -control 
agents through different means for the conservation 
of bio-control agents. 
Crop plants and their pests or crop  pests and 
their natural enemies have adapted to each other 
over time in a process called co-evolution. The 
genetic diversity evolved by pests and their natural 
enemies through co -evolution is particularly 
complex because both are genetically variable over  
time and space, which eventually resulted into 
unsuccessful innundative or inoculative 
augmentation processes. The conservation of 
natural enemies including agro biodiversity in a 
small area within local environments help to ensure 
that the ongoing proces ses of evolution and 
adaptation of those beneficial insect pests to their 
environments are maintained within farming 
systems. This benefit is central to in situ 
conservation, as it is helpful as reservoir for further 
augmentation of already adapted parasit e, predators 
and entomo -pathogens over rest the field 
afterwards.  
 
Programmes to be implemented for the 
Conservation & Augmentation of bio -control 
agents: 
1. Conducting fixed plot surveys through FFS to 
note the seasonal build up of pests & defenders 
(bio-control agents). 
2. Conducting trials for ecological engineering and 
habitat manipulation 
3. Installation of conservation devices through 
conservation cages, bamboo cage, bird pearcher 
etc.  
 
 
4. Wide publicity through hoarding, audio visuals 
etc.  
5. Farmers education & HRD through Participatory 
Action Research (PAR) activities like field 
exercises on different aspects, insect zoo etc. 
6. Conducting AESA in FFS fields. 
7. Development & Strengthening of bio -control 
labs through Self Help Groups (SHG) 
8. Capacity building of staff 
 
Tools for conservation & augmentation of bio -
control agents: 
1. List of prevailing bio -control agents in a 
particular area 
2. Albums for visual identification of bio control 
agents, diseases and weeds 
3. Preparation of insect zoo 
4. Conservation devices like conser vation cages, 
bamboo preacher, bird preachers etc. 
5. To maintain in-situ bio-agent sanctuary by 
CIPMCs 
6. Formats for observations 
 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
43 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Items required for conservation & augmentation 
kit: 
1. Vehicle (4 wheel drive) with driver 
2. Survey route map 
3. Survey Performa 
4. Pen or pencil, Eraser, Sharpener 
5. Writing pad 
6. GPS enabled Data logger  
7. Collection vials with lid 
8. Cotton 
9. Rubber bands 
10. Brush  
11. Needle 
12. Thread 
13. Polythene bags 
14. Aspirator 
15. Sweeping / butterfly net 
16. Watch glass 
17. Hand lenses of different capacity 
18. Chloroform 
19. Killing bottle 
20. Pruning knife 
21. Spade 
22. Khurpi 
23. Mt. square/Quadrant 
24. Kit bag 
25. Hand Gloves 
26. Gum boots/sleeper 
27. Forceps 
28. Scissors  
29. Cloth 
30. Muslin cloth 
31. Field cap 
32. Rain coat/Umbrella 
33. Stapler with pins 
34. Blotting paper 
35. Herbarium press 
36. Entomological pins 
37. Plastic/polythene bags 
38. Paper soap/liquid soap 
39. Torch with cell 
40. First aid box with medicine 
41. Blade 
42. Drawing sheets 
43. Sketch pens 
44. Field camera 
45. Mobile phone 
46. Water bottle 
47. Stick  
48. Half pant 
49. Field Apron/T-shirt 
50. Measuring tape 
51. Tags/Labels  
 
 
Some pests and their common natural enemies 
PESTS 
NATURAL ENEMIES 
Lacewings 
Lady bird beetles 
Parasitic flies 
Parasitic wasps 
Predatory mites 
Other groups and 
examples 
aphids • •   •   entomopathogenic fungi  
syrphid fly larvae 
caterpillars  •   • •   Bacillus thuringiensis  
birds, pathogenic fungi 
and viruses, predaceous 
wasps, Trichogramma 
spp., spiders, predacious 
bugs. 
cottony 
cushion 
scale 
  • •     vedalia beetle 
whitefly 
• •   • • Coccinellid beetls 
lace 
bugs • •   •   pirate bugs  
spiders 
mealy bugs • •   • • mealybug destroyer lady 
beetle 
psyllids • •   •   pirate bugs 
scales • •   • • Aphytis spp. (armored 
scale parasites) 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
44 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
slugs,  
snails     •     predaceous ground 
beetles 
vertebrates 
spider 
mites 
• •     • sixspotted thrips  
Stethorus sp. (spider 
mite destroyer lady 
beetle) 
thrips •       • predatory thrips 
weevils, root or  
soil-dwelling 
          Steinernema 
carpocapsae and Hetero
rhabditis 
bacteriophora(entomopa
thogenic nematodes), 
soil dwelling predatory 
beetles and other 
predators. 
 * 
http://www.ipm.ucdavis.edu/PMG/PESTNOTES/p
n74140.html 
Ways and Means  of Conservation of Natural 
Enemies of Crop pests 
1. Avoiding blanked sprays of Pesticides and 
adopting spot application as a last resort. 
2. Replacing chemical pesticides with bio -
pesticides. 
3. Growing of Trap crops (attractant crops for 
natural enemies) and flowering plants like dill, 
anise, spear mint, buck wheat, yarrow, white 
clover, tansy, cow pea, fennel, cosmos etc. 
4. Intercropping with nectar rich plants like 
caraway, coriander, sunflower, parsley 
(ajwain), mustard, marigold, carrot, alfalfa, 
corn flowering/push-pull plants.  
5. Installation of conservation cages or bamboo 
cages. 
6. By growing the crops that provide Pollen and 
Honey dew to the natural enemies. 
7. Augmenting the population from areas of 
abundance to the areas of absence. 
8. Avoiding the trash burning wher e the 
abundance of Natural enemies is found. 
9. By releasing proper strains of natural enemies 
timed with proper pest stage. 
10. Promoting Non -chemical methods of Pest 
Management like bio-pesticides 
11. Keeping a regular and strict surveillance 
Programme to note the buildup of population 
of Crop pests and their natural enemies. 
12. By educating the Farmers ‘How to conserve 
the natural enemies in their crop fields’ by way 
of demonstration.  
13. By adopting P: D ratio and AESA. 
14. Reduce the use of broad spectrum persistent 
pesticides where ever possible. Use reduced 
risk pesticides. Avoid use of neonicotinoids 
and other chemicals which are 
highly/moderately toxic to honey bees in crops 
pollinated by honey bees.  
15. Certain weeds in rice environment are infested 
with insects that alte rnatively support rice pest 
parasitoids in off -season. Nanophyes sp. on 
Ammania baccifera  L. a weed in rice fields 
have been identified as a reservoir host 
supporting parasitoids like Neanastatus 
cinctiventris Girault on gall midge, 
Trichomalopsis sp. on Pelopidas mathias  
(Fabr.).  
 
Ammania baccifera 
16. Intercropping of crop plants like mustard and 
linseed (alsi) etc. provide nectar to the 
parasitoids and support their population. 
17. Efforts to educate farmers in recognizing 
natural enemies and the beneficial ro le played 
by them are important as the role played by the 
parasitoids remain unnoticed. Utilization 
conservation of natural enemies in situ in the 
rice ecology is the most practical option 
available for promotion of natural bio-control. 
18. Birds are the effic ient predators of various 
insect pests. Efforts should be done to educate 
farmers about the role of predatory bird and 
their need in crop ecosystem. 
19. Conserve spiders in field 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
45 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Conserve and Augment the following BC Agents 
Name of BC 
Agents  
 Ways & Means  of 
conservation  
Bracon sp. Braconides feed on honey dew, 
nectar or pollen; hence, the 
flower plants like Dill, Parsiety, 
Zinnia, Clover, Aalfa -alfa, 
Cosmos, and Sunflower may be 
grown on border or as 
intercrops to attract the native 
Braconides population.  
Cotesia sp. By planting above flowering 
herbs 
Trichogramma Releases may be timed with 
presence of host egg stage in 
the field 
-Suitable strains must be 
release. 
-Continue the releases till the 
natural breeding is established.  
 
Epiricania 
melanoliuca 
-Strict surveillance programme 
may be put in operation. 
- Avoid indiscriminate trash 
burning. 
-Augmenting in new area. 
-Avoiding Aerial spray of 
pesticides.  
Damsel bug 
(Nevid sp.) 
-Collect from the areas of high 
abundance and release them to 
the areas of absence.  
Damsel and 
Dragon fly 
Larvae found in water. 
Maintain watery condition 
around field by making a water 
channel. 
Ground beetle 
(Ophionia)/ 
Rove 
beetle/carabid 
beetle 
Strip mulching provides 
permanent pest and perennial 
planting. 
-Plant white c lover or 
Amaranths sp. as ground cover. 
Rove beetles 
(Staphylinid 
beetles) and 
Ground 
Beetles(Carabid 
beetles ) 
* Conserve or develop refuges 
for soil dwelling rove beetles. 
This could be done by 
promoting plant diversity, using 
mulches and keeping stones , 
logs or other items that provide 
protection.  
Green lace wing  
(Chrysoperla 
sp.) 
 
 
 
 
 
Plant flowering plants such as 
Dill, Parsiety, Zinnia, Clover, 
Aalfa-alfa, Cosmos, Sunflower, 
Carrot, Dandelion as they are 
good source of pollen and 
Nectar for adults. Provide the 
source of water during dry 
season. Maintain perennial 
 
 
Lacewings  
 
plant like mango, Litchi etc.  
*Make sure flowers (e.g. dill, 
sunflower, carrots) are present 
in the field or close to the crop 
to ensure food supply for adult 
lacewings. Pop ulations can be 
maintained on a non -pest aphid 
species and other hosts outside 
crop area (in weedy areas on 
field margins).  
Lady bird beetle Avoid indiscriminate use of 
pesticides. Grow fodder crops 
like Barseem. Collect from the 
plants like Calotropis a nd 
release them in desired fields.  
*Ladybirds can be encouraged 
by growing non -crop plants 
which support aphid species 
which do not attack crops. 
Grow strips or groups of non -
crop flowering plants such as 
fennel, thistles, coriander, 
carrots and/or milkwe ed. They 
can also be brought in by hand 
from outside the crop. Spraying 
with pesticides should be 
avoided wherever possible in 
order not to kill the ladybird 
adults and larvae but if it is 
necessary, selective pesticides 
and methods should be used.  
Spider Mulching in strips. Avoid 
indiscriminate use of pesticides. 
Hover-flies  *Hover flies can be encouraged 
by allowing non -crop plants to 
grow around fields - these 
support non -pest species of 
aphids that hover fly larvae can 
feed on. They are attracted to  
all flowering plants but 
especially to fennel, milkweed, 
sun hemp, 
flowering brassicas or wild 
mustard, thistles, sunflower, 
coriander and dill. In rape and 
kale, some of the previous crop 
can be left to flower (provided 
the pest and disease levels are 
low) or a small number of 
plants from the current crop can 
be encouraged to bolt and 
flower by stopping watering. 
Avoid spraying with pesticides 
whenever possible but if it is 
necessary, use selective 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
46 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
pesticides and methods.  
 
Predatory Ants  * Excessive hoe ing or 
ploughing will destroy ant nests 
so farming systems which use 
minimum tillage (very little 
hoeing or ploughing) are more 
likely to encourage beneficial 
ants. 
Predatory thrips  *Avoid use of broad spectrum 
pesticides.  
Parasitic flies   
 
*Provide sugar containing food 
sources for the adult such as 
flowers or honeydew. 
Encourage habitat diversity. 
Avoid spraying pesticides. 
When necessary select a 
product and application method 
that is less harmful to  natural 
enemies.  
*Source: www.infonet-biovision.org 
 
BIO-CONTROL AGENTS OF DIFFERENT 
CORPS 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Bio -
Control Agents 
 
Crops Pests 
1. Trichogramma 
chilonis  
Cotton Strain 
Cotton Bollworms 
2. Trichogramma 
chilonis  
Sugarcane Strain 
Sugarcane / 
Rice 
Borers 
3. Trichogramma 
exiguum 
Sugarcane Borers 
4. T. minutum Sugarcane Borers 
5. T. perkinsi Sugarcane Borers 
6. T. faciatum Sugarcane Borers 
7. T. brasilienses Cotton Bollworm 
8. T. pretiosum Cotton  Bollworm 
9. T. embriophagum Apple Codling 
moth 
10. T. coccai palladium Apple Codling 
moth 
11. Trichogramma 
toidea spp. 
Rice/ 
vegetable 
Borers  
12. Bracon hebetor Cotton/ 
gram/ 
vegetable 
Bollworm/ 
Pod borer/ 
fruit borer 
13. Bracon brevicornis Cotton/ 
gram/ 
vegetable 
Bollworm / 
Pod borer / 
fruit borer 
14. Bracon kirkpatricki Cotton / Bollworm / 
gram / 
vegetable 
Pod borer / 
fruit borer 
15. Chelonus 
blackburni 
Cotton / 
gram / 
vegetable 
Bollworm / 
Pod borer / 
fruit borer 
16. Chelonus kelliae Potato Potato tuber 
moth 
17. Telenemus remus Cotton/soya
bean 
Spodeptera 
litura  
18. Apantelese flavipes Maize  Stem borer 
19. Sticholotis 
madagassa 
Sugarcane Scale insect 
20. Lindorus 
lophanthae 
Sugarcane Scale insect 
21. Chilocorus bijugus Apple / 
Citrus 
Scale insect 
22. Pharoscymnus 
perniciosi 
Apple / 
Citrus 
Scale insect 
23. Iceriya purchasii  Citrus Scale insect 
24. Encarsia perniciosi Apple  Scale insect 
25. Encarsia spp. Fruit / 
vegetable 
White Fly 
26. Aphytis spp.  Apple Scale insect 
27. Pharoscymnus 
horni 
Sugarcane Scale insect 
28. Aphidius spp. Mustard Aphid 
29. Amblysius spp. Cotton / 
apple  
Mite 
30. Aphelinus mali Apple Woolly 
aphis 
(Eriosoma 
lanigerum)  
31. Neochetina 
eichhornai 
Water 
hyacinth 
Weed 
Weed  
32. Neochetina bruchi Water 
hyacinth 
Weed 
Weed  
33. Zygogramma 
bicolorata 
Parthenium 
weed 
Weed 
34. DD-136 nematode 
Neo-aplectana 
carpocapsae 
Rice Borer 
35. Paratheresia 
claripalpis 
Sugarcane  Borer 
36. Eucelatoria bryani Gram H. 
armigera 
37. Chrysoperla 
scelestes 
Cotton Sucking 
pest / 
bollworm 
38. Chrysoperla carnia  Cotton Sucking 
pest / 
bollworm 
39. NPV of H. Cotton /  H. 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
47 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
armigera Gram/ 
Vegetable 
armigera 
40. NPV of spodoptera 
litura 
Cotton/ 
Soyabean/ 
vegetable 
Spodoptera 
litura 
41. Sturmiopsis  Sugarcane/ 
tomato / 
rice  
Borers 
42. Tetrastichus spp. Rice  Borers 
43. Goniozus spp. Rice Leaf folder 
44. Cryptolemus spp. Grape vein/ 
citrus / 
coffee 
Mealy bug 
45. Scymnus spp. Grape vein/ 
citrus / 
coffee 
Mealy bug 
 
Natural enemies of crop pests in India 
Parasitoids 
HYMENOPTERA 
 Acerophagus papayae Noyes & Schauff 
 Aenasius advena Compere 
 Aenasius bambawalei Hayat 
 Aenasius indicus (Narayanan & Subba Rao) 
 Allotropa sp. 
 Amitus spp. 
 Anagyrus agraensis Saraswat 
 Anagyrus loecki Noyes & Menezes 
 Anicetus ceroplastodis (Mani) 
 Aphanogmus fijiensis (Ferriere) 
 Apenesia sahyadrica Azevedo & Waichert 
 Blepyrus insularis (Cameron) 
 Bolangera sankarani Hayat & Noyes 
 Bracon brevicornis (Wesmael) 
 Bracon hebetor (Say) 
 Brachymeria nephantidis Gahan 
 Callaspidia notata (Boyer de Fonscolombe) 
 Campoletis chlorideae Uchida 
 Cephaleta australiensis Howard 
 Cephaleta brunniventris Motschulsky 
 Charops bicolor (Szepligeti) 
 Chelonus blackburni Cameron 
 Comperiella indica Ayyar 
 Coccidoxenoides perminutus Girault 
 Coccophagus ceroplastae (Howard) 
 Coccophagus pseudococci Compere 
 Cotesia flavipes (Cameron) 
 Cotesia vestalis Haliday 
 Diaeretiella rapae (Mc'Intosh) 
 Diplazon laetatorius (Fabricius) 
 Dirhinus anthracia Walker 
 Distatrix papilionis (Viereck) 
 Elasmus spp. 
 Encarsia guadeloupae Viggiani 
 Encyrtus aurantii (Geoffroy) 
 Eriborus argenteopilosus (Cameron) 
 Exoristobia philippinensis Ashmead 
 Goniozus nephantidis (Muesebeck) 
 Gryon fulviventre (Crawford) 
 Ischnojoppa luteator (Fabricius) 
 Isotima javensis (Rohwer) 
 Leptomastix dactylopii (Howard) 
 Marietta leopardina Motschulsky 
 Megastigmus viggianii Narendran & Sureshan 
 Meteoridea hutsoni (Nixon) 
 Neocharitopus orientalis (Agarwal) 
 Neodusmetia sangwani (Subba Rao) 
 Nesolynx thymus (Girault) 
 Oomyzus sokolowskii (Kurdjumov) 
 Plagiomerus bangaloriensis Shafee et al. 
 Podagrion spp. 
 Praleurocerus viridis (Agarwal) 
 Prochiloneurus aegyptiacus (Mercet) 
 Prochiloneurus albifuniculus Hayat et al. 
 Prochiloneurus pulchellus Silvestri 
 Promuscidea unfasciativentris Girault 
 Pseudleptomastix mexicana Noyes & Schauff 
 Quadrastichus mendeli Kim & La Salle 
 Scutellista caerulea (Fonscolombe) 
 Stenobracon deesae (Cameron) 
 Stenobracon nicevillei (Bingham) 
 Tetrastichus howardii (Olliff) 
 Tetrastichus schoenobii Ferriere 
 Theocolax elegans (Westwood) 
 Trichogrammatids 
 Trichopria sp. 
 Xanthopimpla stemmator (Thunberg) 
LEPIDOPTERA 
 Epiricania melanoleuca (Fletcher) 
DIPTERA 
 Halidaia luteicornis (Walker) 
 Peribaea orbata (Wiedemann) 
Insect Predators 
COLEOPTERA: COCCINELLIDAE 
 Anegleis cardoni (Weise) 
 Axinoscymnus puttarudriahi Kapur & Munshi 
 Brumoides suturalis (Fabricius) 
 Coelophora bissellata Mulsant 
 Chilocorus circumdatus (Gyllenhal) 
 Chilocorus nigrita (Fabricius) 
 Cheilomenes sexmaculata (Fabricius) 
 Coccinella transversalis Fabricius 
 Coccinella septempunctata Linnaeus 
 Cryptolaemus montrouzieri Mulsant 
 Curinus coeruleus (Mulsant) 
 Harmonia dimidiata (Fabricius) 
 Harmonia eucharis (Mulsant) 
 Harmonia octomaculata (Fabricius) 
 Hippodamia variegata (Goeze) 
 Hyperaspis maindroni Sicard 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
48 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 Illeis cincta (Fabricius) 
 Megalocaria dilatata (Fabricius) 
 Nephus regularis Sicard 
 Pharoscymnus flexibilis (Mulsant) 
 Pharoscymnus horni (Weise) 
 Rodolia amabilis Kapur 
 Rodolia fumida (Mulsant) 
 Scymnus castaneus Sicard 
 Scymnus coccivora Ramakrishna Ayyar 
 Scymnus nubilus Mulsant 
 Scymnus latemaculatus Motschulsky 
 Serangium parcesetosum Sicard 
 Synonycha grandis (Thunberg) 
COLEOPTERA: NITIDULIDAE 
 Cybocephalus spp. 
COLEOPTERA: STAPHYLINIDAE 
 Oligota sp. 
 Paederus fuscipes Curtis 
NEUROPTERA: CHRYSOPIDAE 
 Chrysopids 
NEUROPTERA: HEMEROBIIDAE 
 Micromus igorotus Banks 
 Micromus timidus Hagen 
HEMIPTERA: ANTHOCORIDAE 
 Blaptostethus pallescens Buchanan-White 
 Cardiastethus exiguus Poppius 
 Orius tantillus (Motschulsky) 
 Xylocoris flavipes (Reuter) 
HEMIPTERA: LYGAEIDAE 
 Geocoris sp. 
HEMIPTERA: PENTATOMIDAE 
 Andrallus spinidens (F.) 
HEMIPTERA: REDUVIIDAE 
 Isyndus heros (F.) 
DIPTERA: CHAMAEMYIIDAE 
 Leucopis sp. 
DIPTERA: CRYPTOCHAETIDAE 
 Cryptochaetum sp. 
DIPTERA: DROSOPHILIDAE 
 Acletoxenus sp. nr. indicus Malloch 
 Cacoxenus (Gitonides) perspicax (Knab) 
DIPTERA: SYRPHIDAE 
 Dideopsis aegrota (Fabricius) 
 Ischiodon scutellaris (Fabricius) 
 Paragus serratus (F.) 
 Paragus yerburiensis Stuckenberg 
 Episyrphus balteatus (F.) 
 Eupeodes confrater (F.) 
LEPIDOPTERA: NOCTUIDAE 
 Coccidiphaga scitula (Rambur) 
LEPIDOPTERA: LYCAENIDAE 
 Spalgis epeus (Westwood) 
LEPIDOPTERA: PYRALIDAE 
 Dipha aphidivora (Meyrick) 
THYSANOPTERA: THRIPIDAE 
 Franklinothrips vespiformis Crawford 
Weed insects 
 Cecidochares connexa Mcquart 
 Cyrtobagous salviniae Calder & Sands 
 Neochetina eichhorniae Warner 
 Neochetina bruchi Hustache 
 Orthogalumna terebrantis Wallwork 
 Pareuchaetes pseudoinsulata (Rego-Barros) 
 Teleonemia scrupulosa Stal 
 Zygogramma bicolorata Pallister 
Invasive pests 
 Hypothenemus hampei Ferrari 
 Leptocybe invasa Kim & La Salle 
 Paracoccus marginatus  Williams & Granara 
de Willink 
 Phenacoccus solenopsis Tinsley 
 Quadrastichus erythrinae Kim 
Potential Invasives 
 Brontispa longissima Gestro 
(Source: National Bureau of Agriculturally 
Important Insect, Bangalore)  
 
Ecological Engineering for cons ervation of Bio -
control agents  
To make the environment better suited for the 
buildup of existing beneficial fauna through 
manipulation of biotic and abiotic factors of 
ecosystem is called ecological engineering.  
Ecological engineer ing for conservation of  bio-
control agents is manipulation of the habitat in the 
crop ecosystem for buildup of beneficial bio-control 
agent. 
Ecological engineering is based on ecological 
principles in which the environment of Agro -eco-
system is made suitable for the better survi val of 
bio-control agents/beneficial fauna. It’s a kind of 
human intervention to manipulate the habitat better 
suited for the buildup of bio-control agents.  
For the better survival and build up of bio -control 
agents in Agro-eco-system, the following things are 
required: 
1. Food in form of pollen and nectar for adult bio -
control agents. 
2. Shelters such as overwintering sites, moderate 
microclimate, etc.  
3. Alternate hosts are required when primary hosts 
are not present. 
 
The knowledge about the following is requir ed for 
the habitat manipulation of pests and their 
Natural Enemies: 
1. Food and habitat of the pests 
2. Factors affecting the growth of pest build up. 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
49 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
3. The time of infestation on crop by the pests and 
the time of development/ build up of bio -control 
agents for the pest in the crop. 
4. The pattern of the development of the pests and 
the level of causing economic damage. 
5. The parasitoids, predators and pathogens of the 
particular crop pests. 
 
Ecological Engineering for pest management -
Above ground: 
To fulfill the above requirement for habitat 
manipulation for making environment suitable for 
multiplication of beneficial fauna in an agro eco 
system, the inter -cropping, border -cropping and 
mix cropping of the flowering plants is required 
which provide nectar/ pollen as food  for various 
bio-control agents and other beneficial fauna. 
Growing of alternate crops as a food for pests 
required for survival of beneficial fauna is another 
way of conservation and habitat manipulation. The 
trap crops and repelling crops for pests are a lso 
grown as intercrop along with the main crop. 
The following flowering crops are generally 
grown as trap/attractant under agro -ecological 
engineering: 
Cosmos, Sunflower, Okra, Hibiscus, Marigold, 
Fennel, Onion, Carrot, Coriender, Sesame, 
Chrysanthemum, T ridax, Mustard, Radish, 
Fagopurum, Ageratum, Alternanthera sp., Alfalfa 
etc. 
 
Ecological Engineering for pest management -
Below ground: 
 Crop rotations with leguminous plants. 
 Keeping soils covered with vegetation and/or 
crop residue. 
 Adding organic matter i n the form of FYM, 
vermi-compost, crop residue 
 Reducing tillage intensity so that hibernating 
natural enemies can be saved. 
 Apply bio-fertilizers producing bio-agents. 
 Apply Mycorrhiza and Plant Growth Promoting 
Rhizobium (PGPR). 
 Apply Trichoderma and Pseudomonas 
fluorescence as seed, nursery treatment and soil 
application (if commercial products are used, 
check for label claim), However, bio -pesticides 
produced by farmers for own consumption in 
their fields, registration is not required. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Photographs of Ecological engineering Demo Field 
 
Above mentioned photographs are sowing the 
demonstration of Ecological Engineering in cole 
crops conducted by the Directorate of plant 
protection, Quarantine & Storage during Krishi 
Vasant 2014 held from 09 -13 Feb, 2014 at CICR 
Nagpur. In this photograph the Cole crops were 
bordered by the Sunflower, Mustard, Marigold and 
Coriander crops. The Sunflower was the tallest crop 
to attract the Helicoverpa pest; it was surrounded by 
the two rows of mustard to attract Chryso perla and 
LBB. Coriander was an excellent crop for attract 
different natural enemies of main crop pets. 
Marigold crop was preferable crop for egg laying of 
Helicoverpa. It was observed that the cabbage and 
cauliflower crops found affected with aphid and th e 
aphid population on Cole crops was found 
parasitized by Aphidius, a potential parasite of 
aphid. This parasite could be able to manage the 
aphid population on Cole crops.  
 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
50 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
 
 
Recognizing Natural Enemies 
Proper identification of pests, and distinguish ing 
pests from their natural enemies, are essential to 
effectively using biological control. Pocket books, 
charts, albums, specimen boxes and live samples of 
crop specific pest & predators should be prepared 
and they should be displayed among farmers and 
extension officials so that one can easily recognize 
natural enemies. 
Encourage these natural enemies  by avoiding 
pesticides that kill them; choosing plants that 
provide them pollen, nectar, and shelter; and 
keeping ants out of pest -infested plants. Common 
predators that eat garden pests are pictured below 
with bars showing their length. 
 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
51 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
  
  
Convergent lady beetle adults  (left) and most reddish lady 
beetle species prefer aphids. Their larvae (right) prefer aphids 
but sometimes eat whiteflies and other soft-bodied insects. 
 
Lady beetle eggs  are 
oblong, widest in their 
middle, usually yellowish 
or orange, and can be laid 
in groups or individually. 
 
Syrphid fly  larvae eat 
mostly aphids but also soft -
bodied mealybugs, psyllids, 
and whiteflies. 
 
  
Green lacewing adults  (left) eat nectar and pollen. Some 
species also eat insects.  Lacewing larvae  (right) feed on 
mites, eggs, and small insects, especially aphids. 
 
Green lacewing eggs  are 
laid on slender stalks in 
groups (as shown here) or 
individually, depending on 
the species. 
 
Soldier beetle adults  eat 
mostly aphids. Their soil -
dwelling larvae eat beetle 
and moth eggs and larvae. 
 
  
Predaceous ground beetle adults  (left) stalk soil -dwelling 
insects, such as cutworms and root maggots. 
Their larvae(right) live on soil and in litter, feeding on almost 
any invertebrate. 
 
Assassin bugs  attack 
almost any insect. 
 
Pirate bugs  attack mites 
and any tiny insect, 
especially thrips. 
 
Western predatory 
mitesattack pest mites. 
 
Sixspotted thrips attack 
mostly mites. 
 
Spiders, including this crab 
spider, attack all types of 
insects. 
 
Praying mantids  don’t 
control pests, because they 
eat both beneficials and 
pests. 
 
Adults of predatory wasps , 
such as this paper wasp, prey 
on caterpillars and other 
insects. 
 
Syrphid fly (flower fly, hover fly) adults eat pollen and nectar and resemble honey bees 
and wasps. Adults act as good pollinator. 
  
Source:www.ipm.ucdavis.edu 
 
Cultural practices that affect natural enemies  
Tillage  
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
52 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Tillage can have a major impact on soil 
organisms and on the relat ionships between 
organisms of different trophic levels. Tillage 
intensity, the method used, the frequency of tillage 
operations and the dates of crop planting and 
harvesting are all factors that can affect natural 
enemies. Generally, reduced tillage promot es a 
more stable environment, which in turn promotes a 
diversity of species. Less tillage is associated with 
greater abundance and diversity of the fauna. 
However, the effects vary from one species to 
another, depending on their specific ecological 
characteristics. For example, species with a soil -
dwelling larval or pupal stage are particularly 
sensitive to tillage. A study carried out with canola 
demonstrated that post -harvest tillage led to a 
reduction the next spring in the rate of emergence 
of parasitoids overwintering in the soil.  
 
Herbicides and pesticides use  
Numerous studies have demonstrated the 
negative effects of pesticides on natural enemy 
communities. The effects on predators and 
parasitoids can be direct (e.g. direct effects on their 
biological functions) or indirect (e.g. effects on 
their secondary resources) may be noticed.  
 
Nitrogen fertilization  
In addition to having an effect on pests, 
fertilization can also impact their natural enemies. 
 
Seeding and harvesting dates  
Seeding and harves ting dates could have an 
impact on both pests and natural enemy 
communities. Harvesting constitutes a massive 
disturbance which may have a greater impact on 
spiders than pesticide use.  
 
Practice IPM:  Integrate the use of host -plant 
resistance, seed treatment, bio-pesticides, and green 
level pesticides to conserve natural enemies. 
Evaluate the potential for interference among 
control strategies and work towards ways that 
promote synergisms among the different aspects of 
crop production technology. 
Wise use of Insecticides:  Insecticides are 
generally non -selective and kills the insects 
uniformly. It is, therefore, desired to select proper 
insecticide wisely by applying mind and use that 
judicially. 
Avoid indiscriminate trash burning:  
Indiscriminate trash burn ing should be avoided to 
conserve natural enemies of crop pests.  
Screening of hibernating parasites:  Screening of 
hibernating parasites in the cotton bolls etc. and 
release them in the field may be done.  
Provide supplementary food:  Provide 
supplementary food for the natural enemies or 
beneficial fauna like predatory ants. Spray dilutes 
sugar solution to provide food for the free living 
natural enemies adults.  
Provide neutral organisms as food to avoid 
cannibalism among predators.  
 
IDENTIFY THE BIO-CONTROL AGENTS 
A. Spiders 
 
 
Araneus mitificus 
 
Thomisus sp. 
 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
53 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
Golden Orb Spider 
 
 
Saint Andrews Cross 
 
 
Chrysso argyrodiformis 
 
 
Cyclosa insulana 
 
 
Cyclosa insulana 
 
 
Leucauge venusta 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
54 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
Lycosa 
 
Lynx spider 
 
Oxypes  
 
Green orb spider 
 
Widow spider 
 
Tetragnatha Spider 
 
  
Crab Spider 
 
 
Water Spider 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
55 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
 
Goblin/Ant Spider 
 
B. Insect Predators 
 
Cicindela punctulata 
 
 
Bembidion quadrimaculat 
 
 
 
Lady bird beetle 
 
 
 
 
Chrysoperla carnea 
 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
56 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
Damsel fly 
 
Dragon fly 
 
Water strider 
 
Xanthopimpla 
 
Cicindella spp. 
 
Geocoris tricolor 
 
  
Assassin bugs (Reduvius sp.) 
 
Syrphid fly larvae 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
57 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
  
Anthocorid bug 
 
Praying mantis 
 
Meadow grass hopper 
 
 
Cryptolaemus montruzieri grub & Adult 
 
C. Parasitoids 
 
Trichogramma sp. 
 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
58 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Chelonus blackburni 
 
 
 
Apanteles sp. 
  
Bracon-hebetor 
 
Tetrasticus 
 
 
 
Epiricania melanoleuca 
 
 
Brachymeria 
 
Tachinid fly 
 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
59 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
Goniozus spp 
 
Gonatocerus spp. 
  
Metopius sp. 
 
 
Trichospilus pupivora 
 
 
Aenasius bambawalei 
 
D. Entomopathogens 
  
Beauveria bassiana 
 
 
Metarhizium anisopliae 
  
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
60 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
NPV infected larvae 
 
AUGMENTATION OF NATURAL ENEMIES 
When resident natural enemies are insufficient, 
their populations can be increased (augmented) 
through the purchase /production and release of 
commercially available (laboratory breed) 
beneficial species. Releases are unlikely to provide 
satisfactory pest control in most situations. Some 
marketed natural enemies are not effective.  
 Two types of procedures are used to obtain 
reduction in pest population. These are: 
1. Innundative releases:  To s aturate the area 
through the regular and mass release of laboratory 
breed bio-control agents to get quick control of the 
pest. The regular releases of the bio -control agents 
are made throughout the crop season at regular 
interval without seeing the broods of the pests. The 
effectiveness of the bio -control agents can be 
judged by seeing the direct and indirect recovery 
trials. As experienced the weekly release of 
Trichogramma sp. @ 20,000 adults or parasitized 
eggs per Acre per week throughout the crop seaso n 
gives control of lepidopteron pests in Sugarcane, 
Cotton, Rice and vegetable crops. The release of 
Trichogramma is not recommended in case of gram 
crop as it is not working due to acidic nature of the 
crop. In such cases the larval parasites like 
Braconid sp. may be augmented.  
Innundative release involves mass multiplication 
and periodic release of natural enemies when pest 
populations approach damaging levels. Natural 
enemies are not expected to reproduce and increase 
in numbers. Control is achieved thr ough the 
released individuals and additional releases are only 
made when pest populations approach damaging 
levels.  
2. Inoculative releases: Inoculative releases are 
those, when the limited numbers of releases of bio -
control agents are made timed with the  presence of 
proper pest stage in the field. Thus we can say that 
Inoculative releases are those where large number 
of individuals are released only once during the 
season and natural enemies are expected to 
reproduce and increase its population for that 
growing season. Hence control is expected from the 
progeny and subsequent generations and not from 
the release itself.  
Examples of natural enemies used in mass releases  
 Chrysoperla carnea : 8,000 -10,000 larvae/acre at 
10-15 days intervals 
Trichogramma spp.:  
 Trichogramma chilonis @ 1,50,000/ha at 
10-15 days intervals 
Epiricania melanoleuca: Field trials conducted by 
Dte. of PPQS have shown that in a problem area, 
field releases of 4000-5000 cocoons and 4-5 lakh 
eggs of E.melanoleuca per Ha where sugarcane 
Pyrilla incidence was noticed in the initial during 
July through proper surveillance, are likely to 
provide good control of Pyrilla pest 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
61 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Recommended doses of bio-control agents by NBAII 
 
Biocontrol 
Agent 
Stage 
supplied 
Systematic 
position 
Target pest Recommended 
dosage 
No. of releases 
Recommended 
PARASITOIDS 
Trichogramma 
Chilonis Ishii (I) # 
Parasitised 
egg cards 
Hymenoptera: 
Trichogrammatidae 
Sugarcane 
borers Chilo infuscatellus, 
Chilo sacchariphagus indicus, 
Chilo auricilius, Acigona 
steniellus; Cotton (Non Bt) 
bollworms Helicoverpa 
armigera, Pectinophora 
gossypiella & Earias spp.; 
Maize stem b orer Chilo 
partellus, Diamond back moth 
Plutella xylostella; Tomato 
fruit borer Helicoverpa 
armigera 
50,000/ha on 
sugarcane and 
vegetables; 
100,000/ha on 
maize and 
1,50,000/ha on 
cotton 
Sugarcane: 4 to 6 releases 
at 10 days intervals for 
early shoot borer; 8 to 10 
releases for stalk, internode 
and Gurdaspur borers 
Cotton ( Non Bt) & 
Vegetables: Six we ekly 
releases 
Maize: Three releases at 
five days intervals 
Trichogramma 
japonicum (I) 
Parasitised 
egg cards 
Hymenoptera: 
Trichogrammatidae 
Top shoot borer of sugarcane 
Scirpophaga e xcerptalis and 
Paddy stem borer Scirpophaga 
incertulas 
Sugarcane & 
Paddy: 50,000/ha 
 
Sugarcane: 4 to 6 releases 
at 10 days intervals on 
observing pest or from 60th 
day  
Paddy: 6 releases on 
appearance of pest or from 
30th day after 
transplantation 
Trichogramma 
achaeae (I)* 
Parasitised 
egg cards 
Hymenoptera: 
Trichogrammatidae Cotton (Non Bt) bollworms 
and Bhendi Borer 
1,50,000/ha on 
cotton (Non Bt) 
 
50,000/ha on 
vegetables 
Six releases at weekly 
intervals 
Trichogramma 
pretiosum (E)* 
Parasitised 
egg cards 
Hymenoptera: 
Trichogrammati
dae 
Tomato fruit 
borer Helicoverpa armigera 
50,000/ha 
 
Six releases at weekly 
intervals on appearance of 
pest or from 45th day from 
transplantation 
Trichogramma 
embryophagum 
(E)* 
Parasitised 
egg cards 
Hymenoptera: 
Trichogrammati
dae 
Apple Codling 
moth Cydia pomonella 
2000 adults per 
tree or 
100,000/ha 
Releases starting from the 
first moth catch, continue at 
weekly intervals till pest 
egg availability in the field 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
62 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Trichogramma 
dendrolimi 
Matsumara (E)* 
Parasitised 
egg cards 
Hymenoptera: 
Trichogrammati
dae 
Targeted 
against tissue borers on maize 
and 
sugarcane  
- - 
Trichogramma 
brassicae (E)* 
Parasitised 
egg cards 
Hymenoptera: 
Trichogrammati
dae 
Diamondback moth Plutella 
xylostella and Cabbage 
butterfly Pieris brassicae on 
cabbage and cauliflower 
100,000/ha Six releases at weekly 
intervals 
Trichogrammatoi
dea 
bactrae (E)* 
Parasitised 
egg cards 
Hymenoptera: 
Trichogrammatid
ae 
Diamond back moth Plutella 
xylostella on cabbage 
2,50,000/ha Five releases at weekly 
intervals 
Telenomus 
remus 
Nixon (E) 
Parasitised 
egg cards 
Hymenoptera: 
Scelionidae 
Tobacco 
caterpillar Spodoptera litura 
1 lakh /ha Three to four 
Releases 
Goniozus 
nephantidis 
(Muesebeck) 
(I) 
Cocoons 
Hymenoptera: 
Bethylidae 
Coconut black- 
headed caterpillar Opisina 
arenosella 
10 adults per 
palm 
Four releases 
Chelonus 
blackburnii 
Cameron (E)* 
Adults 
Hymenoptera: 
Braconidae 
Potato tuber 
moth Phthorimaea operculella 
50000 adults /ha 
in the field 
2 adults per kg of 
potatoes in 
godowns 
Two releases at weekly 
intervals 
 
Three to four releases (or as 
per nee d) at fortnightly 
intervals 
PREDATORS 
Cryptolaemus 
montrouzieri 
Mulsant (E) 
Adults/ Grubs 
Coleoptera: 
Coccinellidae Mealy bugs 
Maconellicoccus hirsutus, 
Planococcus citri, P. lilacinus 
10 beetles or 
50 grubs 
/infested plant or 
tree or 5000 
beetles/ha 
One or more 
releases based on pest 
intensity 
Scymnus 
coccivora 
(Ramakrishn
a Ayyar) (I) 
Adults 
Coleoptera: 
Coccinellida
e 
Mealy bugs on citrus, grapes 
and other fruit crops (M. 
hirsutus, Planococcus spp. 
600 – 2500 
adults/ha 
One or more releases based 
on pest intensity 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
63 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Chilocorus nigrita 
(Fabricius) (I) 
Adults / Eggs 
Coleoptera: 
Coccinellidae 
Sugarcane scale insect 
Melanaspis glomerata Citrus 
scale Aonidiella aurantii 
1500 beetles/ha; 
or 10  egg pads 
(with 40 eggs per 
pad) in 100 
spots/ha (40,000 
eggs/ha)10 
adults/tree 
One or more releases based 
on pest intensity 
Cheilomenes 
sexmaculata 
Fabricius (I)* 
Adults / Eggs 
Coleoptera: 
Coccinellidae Aphis craccivora 
on legumes a nd Lipaphis 
erysimi on oilseed crops 
5000 larvae  
or 500 adults per 
ha 
Two releases; 
first release to coincide 
with the  appearance of 
aphids 
Coccinella 
septempunctata 
Linnaeus (I)* 
Adults / Eggs 
Coleoptera: 
Coccinellidae 
Aphis craccivora on legumes 
and Lipaphis e rysimi on 
oilseed crops 
5000 larvae or 
500 adults per ha 
Two releases; first release 
to coincide w ith the  
appearance of aphids 
Brumoides 
suturalis 
(Fabricius) (I)* 
Adults 
Coleoptera: 
Coccinellidae Aphids and white flies - - 
Curinus 
coeruleus 
Mulsant (E) 
Adults 
Coleoptera: 
Coccinellidae Subabul psyllid Hetropsylla 
cubana 
20 Adults per 
tree 
Two releases during July 
and October 
Chrysoperla 
carnea 
(Stephens) (I) 
Eggs / First 
instar larvae 
Neuroptera: 
Chrysopidae 
Sucking pests on cotton, 
tobacco, sunflower, 
groundnut& some fruit crops 
10,000 first 
instar larvae/ha 
Twice during the season 
with an interval of 15 days 
On fruit crops, 10 – 20 
larvae per infested tree 
Mallada spp. (I) * 
Cocoons 
Coleoptera:  
Coccinellidae 
Sucking pests on cotton, 
tobacco, sunflower, 
groundnut& some fruit crops 
10,000 first 
instar larvae/ha 
Twice during the season 
with an interval of 15 days 
On fruit crops, 10 – 20 
larvae per infested tree 
Ischiodon 
scutellaris 
(Fabricius) (I) 
* 
Cocoons 
Diptera: 
Syrphidae 
Aphis craccivora on legumes 
and Lipaphis e rysimi on 
oilseed crops 
5000 larvae/ha - 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
64 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Micromus 
timidus 
(Hagen) (I) * 
Larvae 
Neuroptera: 
Hemerobiidae A. craccivora on legumes & 
oilseeds & Sugarcane Woolly 
Aphid 
Research in 
progress 
Research in progress 
Cardiastethus 
exiguus Poppius 
(I) 
Adults/ Nymphs 
Hemiptera: 
Anthocoridae 
Opisina arenosella Coconut 
black- headed caterpillar 
50 nymphs/adults 
per tree 
Three releases 
Blaptostethus 
pallescens 
Poppius 
(I) 
Adults/ Nymphs 
Hemiptera: 
Anthocoridae 
Spider mites on bhendi 5 to 10 nymphs 
per plant 
Five releases 
# Sugarcane, Cotton and Vegetable strains of T. 
chilonis maintained; I: Indigenous; E: Exotic 
 
Tips for Augmentation of Bio-control agents: 
1. Always release ferrate adults (newly emerg ing 
adults) of parasitoids in the field. Release 
eggs/nymphs/grubs/adults of insect predators 
as the case may be. 
2. Releases must be made in early morning or in 
evening hours. 
3. Do not release long stored in fridge (over 
frozen) parasitized eggs. 
4. Always see the percentage of parasitization on 
Trichocard before release. 
5. Always release the Trichocard ensuring their 
safety with rain and wind conditions (adverse 
weather conditions). 
6. Attempt larval parasites along with the egg 
parasites for augmentation to get the d esired 
result. 
7. Ensure quality of bio -control agents to be 
released. 
8. Procure parasites from authentic source. 
9. Develop field level technology for mass 
multiplication of bio-control agents. 
10. Transfer/transport bio -control agents in ice 
boxes to avoid the emerg ence of adults on the 
way before releasing them in the field. 
11. Crop specific strains of parasitoids should be 
released to get the desired control. 
12. Indigenous bio -control agents are found more 
effective than exotic one. 
13. Restrict/prevent movement of ants by b anding 
with pesticide on tree trunks in orchards before 
releasing insect predators of mealy bugs. 
14. Provide sufficient food for the insect predators 
in packages during transport before field 
release in order to prevent cannibalism. 
Farmers can augment the number of natural 
enemies by bringing them from the field. for 
example, ladybird beetles or parasitized 
aphids/larvae/egg masses which contain young 
parasitoids. 
Information on Bio-control agents against insect pests 
Common 
name  
Concept of 
active ingredient 
in the 
formulation  
Target organism 
/host 
Method of 
application  
Recommende
d dose & 
mode of 
application 
Reason for 
recommendation 
Acerophagus 
papayae  
 
Endoparasitoids 
of papaya 
mealybug  
 
On papaya 
mealybug 
Paracoccus 
marginatus  
Field 
release  
 
250 
per ha  
 
To reduce 
mealybug 
infestation  
 
Anagyrus 
loecki  
 
Endoparasitoids of 
papaya mealybug  
 
On papaya 
mealybug 
Paracoccus 
marginatus  
Field 
release  
 
250 
per ha  
 
To reduce 
mealybug 
infestation  
 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
65 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Pseudleptom
astyx 
mexicana  
 
Endoparasitoids 
of papaya 
mealybug  
 
On papaya 
mealybug 
Paracoccus 
marginatus  
 Field 
release  
 
 250 
per ha  
 
 To reduce 
mealybug 
infestation  
 
Trichogramm
a chilonisIshii 
(I) #  
Hymenoptera: 
Trichogramm
atidae  
 
 Parasitised 
egg cards  
 
Sugarcane borers 
Chilo infuscatellus, 
Chilo 
sacchariphagus 
indicus, Chilo 
auricilius, Acigona 
steniellus; Cotton 
(Non Bt) 
bollworms 
Helicoverpa 
armigera, 
Pectinophora 
gossypiella & 
Earias spp.; Maize 
stem borer Chilo 
partellus, Diamond 
back moth Plutella  
xylostella; Tomato 
fruit borer 
Helicoverpa 
armigera  
Field release   50,000/ha 
on 
sugarcane 
and 
vegetables; 
100,000/ha 
on maize 
and 
1,50,000/ha 
on cotton  
 
Sugarcane: 4 to 
6 releases at 10 
days intervals for 
early shoot borer; 
8 to 10 releases 
for stalk, 
internode and 
Gurdaspur borers  
Cotton (Non Bt) 
& Vegetables: 
Six weekly 
releases  
Maize: Three 
releases at five  
days intervals  
 
 
Trichogramm
a japonicum 
(I)  
Hymenoptera: 
Trichogramm
atidae  
 
Parasitised 
egg cards  
 
Top shoot borer 
of sugarcane 
Scirpophaga 
excerptalis and 
Paddy stem 
borer 
Scirpophaga 
incertulas  
 
Field release  
 
Sugarcane & 
Paddy: 
50,000/ha  
 
Sugarcane: 4 to 
6 releases at 10 
days intervals on 
observing pest or 
from 60th day  
Paddy: 6 releases 
on appearance of 
pest or from 30th 
day after 
transplantation 
T. achaeae (I)*  
Hymenoptera: 
Trichogrammatidae  
 
Parasitise
d egg 
cards  
 
Cotton (Non 
Bt) 
bollworms 
and Bhendi 
Borer  
 
Field 
release  
 
1,50,000/ha 
on cotton 
(Non Bt)  
50,000/ha on 
vegetables  
 
Six releases 
at weekly 
intervals  
 
Trichogramma 
pretiosum (E)*  
Hymenoptera: 
Trichogrammati
dae  
 
Parasitised egg 
cards  
 
Tomato fruit 
borer 
Helicoverpa 
armigera  
 
Field release  
 
50,000
/ha  
 
Six releases at 
weekly intervals 
on appearance of 
pest or from 45th 
day from 
transplatation  
Trichogramm
a 
embryophagu
m (E)*  
Hymenoptera:  
Trichogramma
tidae  
Parasitised egg 
cards  
 
Apple Codling 
moth Cydia 
pomonella  
 
Field release  
 
2000 adults 
per tree or 
100,000/ha  
 
Releases starting 
from the first 
moth catch, 
continue at 
weekly intervals 
till pest egg 
availability in the 
field 
Trichogramma Parasitised egg Diamondback Field release  100,000 Six releases 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
66 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
brassicae (E)*  
Hymenoptera: 
Trichogrammati
dae  
 
cards  
 
moth Plutella 
xylostella and 
Cabbage butterfly 
Pieris brassicae on 
cabbage and 
cauliflower  
 /ha  
 
at weekly 
intervals  
 
Trichogramm
atoidea 
bactrae (E)*  
Hymenoptera: 
Trichogramma
tidae  
Parasitised 
egg cards 
 
Diamond 
back moth 
Plutella 
xylostella 
on cabbage  
 
Field 
release  
 
2,50,000
/ha  
 
Five releases 
at weekly 
intervals  
 
Telenomus 
remus Nixon 
(E)  
Hymenoptera: 
Scelionidae  
Parasitised egg 
cards 
Tobacco 
caterpillar 
Spodoptera 
litura  
 
Field release 1 lakh 
/ha  
 
Three to 
four 
releases  
 
Goniozus 
nephantidis 
(Muesebeck) 
(I)  
Hymenoptera: 
Bethylid 
Cocoons  
 
Coconut black-
headed 
caterpillar 
Opisina 
arenosella  
 
Field  
release on 
tree trunks  
 
10 adults 
per palm  
 
Four 
releases  
 
Chelonus 
blackburnii 
Cameron (E)* 
Hymenoptera: 
Braconidae  
 
Adults  
 
Potato tuber 
moth 
Phthorimaea 
operculella  
 
Field 
release  
 
50000 
adults /ha in 
the field  
2 adults per 
kg of 
potatoes in 
godowns  
 
Two releases at 
weekly intervals  
Three to four 
releases (or as per 
need) at 
fortnightly 
intervals 
Cryptolaemus  
montrouzieri 
Mulsant (E)  
Coleoptera: 
Coccinellidae  
  
Adults / Grubs  
 
Mealy bugs  
Maconellicocc
us hirsutus, 
Planococcus 
citri, P. 
lilacinus 
 
Field 
release  
 
10 beetles or 
50 grubs 
/infested 
plant or tree 
or 5000 
beetles/ha 
  
One or more  
releases 
based on 
pest 
intensity  
  
 
Scymnus 
coccivora 
(Ramakrishna 
Ayyar) (I) 
Coleoptera: 
Coccinellidae 
Adults  
 
Mealy bugs on 
citrus, grapes and 
other fruit crops 
(M. hirsutus, 
Planococcus spp.  
Field 
release  
 
600 – 2500 
adults/ha  
 
One or more 
releases based 
on pest 
intensity  
 
Chilocorus 
nigrita 
(Fabricius) (I) 
Coleoptera: 
Coccinellidae  
 
Adults / Eggs  
 
Sugarcane scale 
insect Melanaspis 
glomerata  
Citrus scale 
Aonidiella aurantii  
 
 
Field 
release  
 
1500 
beetles/ha; or 
10 egg pads 
(with 40 eggs 
per pad) in 100 
spots/ha 
(40,000 
eggs/ha)  
10 adults/tree  
One or more 
releases based 
on pest 
intensity  
 
Cheilomenes 
sexmaculata 
Fabricius (I)* 
Coleoptera: 
Adults / Eggs  
 
Aphis 
craccivora on 
legumes and 
Lipaphis 
Field 
release  
 
5000 larvae 
or 500 
adults per 
ha  
 
Two releases; 
first release to 
coincide with 
the appearance 
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
67 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Coccinellidae  
 
erysimi on 
oilseed crops  
 
of aphids  
 
Coccinella 
septempunctat
a Linnaeus 
(I)* 
Coleoptera:  
Coccinellidae  
Adults / Eggs  
 
Aphis craccivora 
on legumes and 
Lipaphis erysimi 
on oilseed crops  
 
Field 
release  
 
5000 larvae 
or 500 
adults per 
ha  
 
Two releases; 
first release to 
coincide with 
the appearance 
of aphids  
 
Curinus 
coeruleus 
Mulsant (E) 
Coleoptera: 
Coccinellidae  
Adults  
 
Subabul psyllid 
Hetropsylla 
cubana 
Field 
release  
 
20 Adults 
per tree  
 
Two 
releases 
during July 
and October  
 
Chrysoperla 
carnea 
(Stephens) (I) 
Coleoptera: 
Coccinellidae  
 
Eggs / First instar 
larvae  
 
Sucking pests 
on cotton, 
tobacco, 
sunflower, 
groundnut& 
some fruit 
crops  
 
Field release 10,000 first 
instar 
larvae/ha  
 
Twice during the 
season with an 
interval of 15 
days  
On fruit crops, 10 
– 20 larvae per 
infested tree  
Mallada spp. 
(I) * 
Neuroptera: 
Chrysopidae  
 
Cocoons  
 
Sucking pests 
on cotton, 
tobacco, 
sunflower, 
groundnut& 
some fruit 
crops  
 
Field release 10,000 first 
instar 
larvae/ha  
 
Twice during the 
season with an 
interval of 15 
days  
On fruit crops, 10 
– 20 larvae per 
infested tree  
Ischiodon 
scutellaris 
(Fabricius) (I) 
* Diptera: 
Syrphidae  
Cocoons  
 
Aphis 
craccivora on 
legumes and 
Lipaphis 
erysimi on 
oilseed crops  
 
Field release 5000 
larvae/ha  
 
One or more 
releases based on 
pest intensity  
 
Cardiastethus 
exiguus Poppius 
(I) Hemiptera: 
Anthocoridae  
 
Adults/Nymphs  
 
Opisina 
arenosella 
Coconut black-
headed 
caterpillar  
 
Field release 50 
nymphs/adu
lts per tree  
 
Three 
releases  
 
Blaptostethus 
pallescens 
Poppius (I) 
Hemiptera: 
Anthocoridae  
Adults/Nymphs  
 
Spider mites 
on bhendi  
 
Field release 5 to 10 
nymphs per 
plant  
 
Five 
releases  
 
Heterorhabditis 
indica (Entomo 
pathogenic 
nematodes)  
 
Infective 
juveniles in 
wettable 
powder  
 
White grubs, 
Root weevils & 
soil pests  
 
Soil 
Application  
 
20k
g/ha  
 
For combating 
Soil insect pests 
and reducing 
chemical 
insecticide usage  
Bacillus 
thuringiensis  
 
Bt crystals and Bt 
spores 5%  
Lepidopteran, 
coleopteran and 
dipteran pests of 
crops  
Foliar 
spray  
 
1kg/ha  
 
To reduce 
the use of 
chemical 
pesticides  
 
Spodoptera 
litura  
Poly hedral 
bodies of the  
Spodoptera 
litura  
 
Foliar 
spray  
 
250 Larval 
Equivalent 
To reduce the 
use of  
CBG-IPM: Conservation & Augmentation 
68 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
Nuclear 
Polyhedrosis 
virus(Sl NPV)  
NPV Virus  
1 X 109PIB/ml  
 
(LE) /ha 
 
chemical 
pesticides  
  
Helicoverpa 
armigera  
Nuclear 
Polyhdrosis 
virus(Ha NPV)  
 
Poly hedral 
bodies of the 
NPV Virus  
1 X 109PIB/ml  
 
Helicoverpa 
armigera  
 
Foliar 
spray  
 
250 Larval 
Equivalent 
(LE) /ha  
 
To reduce 
the use of 
chemical 
pesticides  
 
Beauveria 
bassiana  
 
Spore cum 
mycelia 
formulation  
1X108 CFU/g/ml  
 
Several insect 
pests of crops  
 
 2.5-5.0kg/ 
hafor foliar 
spray  
2.5-5.0 
kg+250-500kg 
FYM /ha for 
soil 
application  
For combating 
insect pests and 
reducing 
chemical 
insecticide usage  
 
Metarhizium 
anisopliae  
 
-do- -do- -do- -do- -do- 
Verticillium 
lecanii  
 
-do- Sucking pests of 
various crops  
 
Foliar 
spray  
 
2.5-5.0kg/ 
hafor foliar 
spray  
-do- 
Paecilomyces 
fumosoroseus  
 
-do- For mite 
control  
 
-do- 2.5-5.0kg/ 
hafor foliar 
spray  
-do- 
 
 
CBG-IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 
69 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) 
For Pests Surveillance & Monitoring 
 
Process to find the target pests in the surveyed 
area is expressed as surveillance and the methods to 
find the target pests is monitoring. Hence by 
monitoring of pests one can perform surveillance. 
Surveillance is the constant, systematic watch 
of biotic and abiotic factors of the crop ecosystem 
in order to predict the pest outbreak. In pest 
surveillance programmes one studies the population 
dynamics and the key natural mortality factors 
operating under field conditions which help in 
devising the appropriate management strategies. 
(Close watch= निगरािी). It is observing something 
for a long period of time  
Pest surveillance implies close and regular 
vigilance over the development of  
 insect-pest population 
 disease   
 weeds, and   
 bio-control agents  
Whereas Survey is conducted to study the 
abundance of a pest species. The  survey conducted 
over a defined period of time and detailed 
inspection to determine the characteristics of a pest 
population or which pest species occur in an are a is 
called as pest survey.  
 
 
 
AGENCIES TO BE INVOLVED FOR 
SURVEILLANCE: 
 State Department of Agriculture / Horticulture 
 State Agricultural Universities. 
 Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
Institute. 
 Crop based Directorates of Department of 
Agriculture and Co-operation of Government of 
India. 
 
 
AIMS & OBJECTIVES OF SURVEILLANCE 
In general, Survey/Surveillance is of two types: 
 1.  General Pest Surveillance (Crop Specific) 
2.  Specific Pest Surveillance (Pest Specific) 
Crop pests  surveys are conducted to monitor 
the pest population on different crops in the area 
and to generate field data of - 
 Ecology 
 Epidemiology of major pest and diseases 
 Reaction of crop variety  
 Estimation of crop losses 
 Status of pest & diseases 
 Role  of Bio-control agents 
 
WHY TO CONDUCT PEST SURVEILLANCE: 
Pest Surveillance is under taken for the 
following purposes:- 
 
1. To monitor and forewarn the crop pests, 
diseases, weeds, and Bio -control agents 
population buildup in the agricultural crops. 
2. To monitor th e locust population in the 
Scheduled Desert Area (SDA) of Rajasthan and 
Gujarat States of India. 
3. To know the occurrence of pests and provide 
basis for pest identification, listing of pest, pest 
status, pest categorization, to conduct risk 
analysis and to e armark the pest prone and pest 
free areas as a pre -requisite for phyto - sanitary 
measures and agreement for global trade. 
  
ADVANTAGES OF SURVEILLANCE 
 to know existing and new species in an area 
 to assess pest population and damage at 
different growth stage of crop 
 to assess natural enemies population and their 
build up at different growth stage of crop 
 to study the influence of weather parameters on 
pests & their natural enemies 
 to study pest status change on a particular crop 
 to assess abundance of na tural enemies and 
their influence on pests 
 to evaluate effect of new cropping pattern and 
varieties on pest 
 to determine pest trends affecting agricultural 
management practice 
 to alert growers and other agriculture 
professionals to the presence of plant  p ests and 
outbreaks.  
 
INSECT FORECASTING MAY SERVE AS 
- To predict the forthcoming infestation level of 
pest          

CBG-IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 
70 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
- To find out the critical stage at which 
management practices should apply  
 
OUTCOME OF THE SURVEILLANCE 
ACTION: 
The surveillance programme is beneficial for:- 
1. Early detection of pest occurrence, outbreaks, 
upsurges  
2. For making suitable pest management strategy 
before the pest causes the economic loss. 
3. For adopting timely pest management 
measures. 
4. For earmarking the endemic, hot spots and pest 
free areas. 
5. For making forewarning and issuing of timely 
advisory to farmers and State Governments. 
6. For managing the pest emergencies. 
7. For knowing the emerging pest problems. 
8. For checking further spread of the pest in the 
other areas. 
9. 10.For adopting pro -active steps for expected 
pest problems. 
 
TYPES OF SURVEY: 
- Qualitative survey :  Useful for detection of 
pest 
- Quantitative survey : Useful for enumeration 
of pest i.e.  numerically abundance of pest 
population in time and space  
- Fixed Plot Survey: In this programme 
cultivated area is divided into four sectors with 
the help of officer -in- charge of the area. All 
sectors should be of equal size. Each of these 
sectors must be accessible by road and properly 
shown in a map, showing number of vil lages in 
each sector. Each sector should have 3 
observational fields of about an acre area. Each 
field should be at least a mile apart from each 
other. Thus there will be in all 12 observational 
fields with each technical observer. Every field 
cultivator must be personally contacted by the 
technical observer to seek his co -operation that 
is going to happen while making observations 
in those fields. Each observer is required to pay 
two visits to each of his observation fields per 
week and survey and sample t he pest and 
natural enemies’ population in accordance with 
sampling methods. An acre plot may be divided 
into 5 - micro plots of meter square area one 
each in four corners (6 -100 meters away from 
bund) and fifth in the centre. Periodical 
assessment is done in these chosen micro plots. 
Agro-ecological parameters have also to be 
noted. Each technical observer will fill the field 
card (See model ann -I&II) each time he makes 
trip to his fields. A note book should be along 
with him to note down any details which cannot 
be accommodated in the field cards and should 
be designated as “Comments”. He should report 
to his in -charge on weekly basis. Report thus 
prepared should be submitted to his in - charge 
who in turn will sent it to State Plant Protection 
Authority, Di rectorate Head quarters and state 
Research Units.  
These plots are to be kept free from chemical 
sprays till Economic Threshold Level (ETL) is 
reached.  
Roving Survey:   Roving Survey is performed 
by assessing pest population/ damage wherein pest 
information is gathered from randomly selected 
spots over large area in a short period. The survey 
routes to be finalized before the commencement of 
the seasons (Kharif/ Rabi) in consultations with 
state department of agricultural officials. The 
survey routes should  cover major crops grown in 
the state. The survey team should be finalized 
before onset of surveillance programmes. The time 
interval between surveys should be at least a 
minimum of ten days. The survey should spread 
over in the entire crop season. The sur vey report 
finalized and sent to Head quarters and to 
concerned district head of state Departments 
through fastest mode. Wherever forewarning is 
required to be issued, it should be done on the same 
day during survey period.  A minimum of 200 -250 
Kms is cov ered in a day. Observations are done at 
least at every ten kilometer distance and on both 
sides of the road. The observation is performed 
after entering  at least 100 mts inside the fields. 
 
 
Single Point Survey (Eye ball method of survey):  
 A qualified plant Pathologist traverses through 
the cropped area, halts at periodic intervals to 
inspect crop health and record all observations. This 
method helps to understand the immediate course of 
action needed to maintain crop health. 
 
Multiple point survey:   
This is conducted at different crop growth 
stages and enables to identify major production 
constraints and predict yields. Such methodically 
collected data for a few crop seasons through 

CBG-IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 
71 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
regular surveys provide necessary information in 
developing disease management strategies. 
 
 
ELECTRONIC-PEST SURVEILLANCE 
THROUGH HAND HELD DEVICE: 
The foundation of electronic pest surveillance 
primarily is based upon to collect, store, access, 
capture and transfer pest information to all 
concerned. This helps the delivery  of data through 
fastest mode. The e- surveillance targets the critical 
requirements of a crop cycle, i.e. pest management. 
The collection of crop data manually is laborious 
and at the same time takes a lot of time to transfer 
from field to the decision ma king authorities. This 
methodology provides the required solution. It is 
estimated that the timely intervention in the crops 
may reduce the crop losses as much as 25 -30 
percent.  
• The hand Held Device (Data Logger) is an 
important field data capture system 
(qualitative), quantitative with Geo-referencing.  
• The device has inbuilt Global Positioning 
System (GPS) so that geo -referenced field data 
can be collected.  
• At the end of the pest surveillance the device 
would generate a data file which can be easily 
transferred through Internet to centralized 
database for Analysis and transferring data into 
usable report.  
• The  project was taken up in couple of states 
and is being pursued by the Directorate to be 
implemented through the CIPMCs.  
 
Data Transmitting & Storage System 
• dacnet/pdmis System :  It  is a system  on pest 
observations, at district level; the system runs at 
state level and a subset of the data is also 
visible at national level (crop, crop stage, pest, 
extent of disease/infestation); the source, and 
principal user, is State departments of 
agriculture, and it is also used to manage 
pesticide availability 
• http://dacnet/iipm System: It  is a system to 
support entry of the results of roving survey 
reports, and includes the potential to report a 
more complete view with Agro Ecosystem 
Analysis (additionally numbers of pests, 
predators, field conditions, weather, etc) and is 
designed to administer CIPMC roving survey 
data  
 
PEST SURVEILLANCE AND ADVISORY 
SYSTEM IN INDIA 
National Pest Surveillance and Advisory Unit. It 
is composed of  
1. Joint Se cretary (Plant Protection), DAC, 
Chairman 
2. ADG (PP), ICAR , Member 
3. Plant Pro tection Advisor, Dte  of PPQ & S, 
Member Convener 
4. Director, NCIPM (ICAR), Member 
5. Representatives of crop specific ICAR 
Institutions – Invited by the Committee  
6. Representatives of St ate Agriculture 
Universities – Nominated by the Committee  
7. Selected Commissione rs/ Director of 
Agriculture -Depending on the season and 
crop 
8. Representatives of NIC 
9. Representatives of farmers - Nominated by the 
Committee 
 
Functions: 
• Coordinating pest surveillance and providing 
guidance to the CIPMCs and States 
• Analysis of pest surveillance data and advice on 
emerging pest threats 
• Enabling the research Institutes for taking up 
special and time bound activities in special 
areas 
• Launching campaign for creating farmer 
awareness on specific situations where 
community action is required 
• Advising the neighb oring States on possible 
pest migration. 
 
State Pest Surveillance and Advisory Unit 
• Commissioners/ Director, State Department of 
Agriculture - Chairman 
• Director of Research, State Agriculture 
University 
• Plant protection experts from State Agriculture 
University 
• Representatives of ICAR Research Institute in 
the State 
• Selected District Joint Directors depending on 
crop season and area 
• Representatives of CIPMC of the State 
• Coordinator of KVK in the State 
• Farmers representatives 
• Selected NGO active in plant protection areas 
• Joint Director/ Deputy Director (PP) - Member 
Convener 
 
Functions: 
• Direct State -wide multi -district surveillance 
activities and manage the data 
• Arranging training of personnel and extend 
support for district level surveillance 
• Analyze repo rts on the pest and disease 
situation district wise 
CBG-IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 
72 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
• Log all issued advisories and ensure that 
advisories and other activities are consistent 
with guidance given 
• Confirm issuing of any State -wise advisories 
prepared by SAU, if needed 
• Arrange special surveys  or surveillance 
depending on the need 
 
DISTRICT PEST SURVEILLANCE AND 
ADVISORY UNIT 
 
• Joint Director (Agriculture/ Horticulture) - 
Chairman 
• Representatives of KVK 
• Representatives of local research institute of 
SAU and/or ICAR 
• Block Agriculture Officers depe nding on the 
season and crop 
• Representatives of farmers groups 
• Assistant Director/ Deputy Director (PP)   -  
Member Convener 
 
Functions: 
• Direct and coordinate local arrangements / 
activities on pest and disease surveillance and 
review results and draft appropriate advisories 
• Arrange to send the data to State and National 
units 
• Communicating the advisories to farmers 
through mass media and print media 
• Taking up special campaigns for surveillance 
and pest control practices 
• Involving the farmers groups, com modity 
groups, NGOs in surveillance and special 
campaigns. 
 
Survey/Surveillance for Assessment of Insect 
Population 
  
1. Stage of the pest & natural enemies to be 
counted.  
(Egg, Larva, Pupa, Adults) 
2. Actual process of counting Sampling - 
Distribution of pest 
 - Percent infection/infestation 
 - Count in number 
 - Availability of natural enemies 
 - Weather parameter 
 - Variety is Susceptible or resistant 
 
Factors affecting insect pest population 
1.  Climate  
• Temperature 
• Relative humidity 
• Rainfall 
• Day length  
2. Migration: Locust swarm etc. 
3. Crop variety-  HYV= are more 
susceptible  for particular pests, consider them 
4. Agronomic practices-  
  spacing, planting date,  nitrogen application 
 
SAMPLING 
A. Sample: A set of unit or portion of 
aggregated material which repr esents the whole 
population. 
Sampling helps – 
• Identifying & monitoring pests & natural 
enemies  
• Understanding biological & environmental 
factors that affect pests & natural enemies  
• Using treatment threshold for control decisions  
• Knowing efficacy of contr ol tactics & impact 
on non-target pests & natural enemies  
 
Sampling patterns:  
• Zigzag pattern- Sampling a fallow field or one 
with no obvious symptoms in the current crop 
to see the incidence- viral, wilt 
• Square pattern- Sampling within the drip line 
of trees and shrubs  
• Star pattern- Sampling from a damaged area.  
• At random pattern- Through the square (1m x 
1m) in field (4-5 points) 
 
 
 
 
 

CBG-IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 
73 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
 
 
ITEMS REQUIRED FOR  SURVEY & 
SURVEILLANCE IN THE KIT: 
1. Vehicle (4 wheel drive) with driver 
2. Survey route map 
3. Survey Proforma 
4. Pen or pencil, Eraser, Sharpener 
5. Writing pad 
6. Collection vials with lid 
7. Cotton 
8. Rubber bands 
9.  Brush  
10. Needle 
11. Thread 
12.  Polythene bags, Butter bapers 
13.  Sweeping / butterfly net 
14.  Watch glass 
15. Hand lenses of different capacity 
16. Chloroform 
17. Killing bottle 
18. Pruning knife 
19. Spade 
20. Khurpi/ Spade 
21.  Meter square/Quadrant 
22. Kit bag 
23. Hand Gloves 
24. Gum boots/sleeper 
25. Forceps 
26.  Scissors  
27. Cloth 
28. Muslin cloth 
29. Field cap 
30.  Rain coat/Umbrella 
31. Stapler with pins 
32. Blotting paper 
33. Herbarium press 
34. Entomological pins 
35. Paper soap/liquid soap 
36. Torch with cell 
37. First aid box with medicines 
38. Blade 
39. Drawing sheets 
40. Sketch pens 
41. Field camera 
42. Mobile phone 
43.  Water bottle 
44.  Stick  
45. Half pant 
46.  Field Apron/T-shirt 
47.  Measuring tape 
48. Tags/Labels  
49.  Drain Spades 
50. Scoop 
 
SAMPLING METHODS: 
1. NET SWEEPING 
2. SUDDEN TRAPPING 
3. LIGHT TRAPS 
4. SUCTION TRAP 
5. ADHESIVE OR STICKY TRAPS 
6. BAIT TRAPS 
7. PHEROMONE TRAPS 
8. WATER PAN METHOD 
9. CROP SAMPLES 
10. PIT FALL TRAP 
11. PLANT SHAKE METHOD 
 
SQUARE METER:  
 In the sampling techniques, the square meter 
has been very often referred to for sampling of 
various insect - pests- diseases and weeds. It is a 
square, formed of four one meter long and about a 
quarter cm thick iron wire firmly fastened at the 
corners to be thrown in the observation field for 
random sampling. It should be sufficiently firm and 
rigid in maintaining the square shape to stand field 
use. 
 
NET SWEEPING 
The points to be considered  
• time of sampling  
• density and height of the crop  
• number of sweeps required  
• the type of insect pest involved in the study.   
 A sweep net is an important ite m in the 
sampling and the collection kit. It must be rigidly 
constructed and handled with care. A standard 
sweep net is 15 inches diameter loop, 24 inches 
long bag made of muslin coarse cloth, and a sturdy 
40 inches long handle.  
 A sidewise sweep will collect more insects than 
an upward or downward sweep and at the same 
time there will be less injury to the insects. Swing 
the net the way in which the pendulum of a clock 
swings. One sweep is equal to 1 pass of the net, and 
the return pass is counted as the second sweep. The 
number of sweeps required to sample an insect is 
relative to the population level but the data should 
be reported as number of insects per sweep. Usually 
ten sweeps may be sufficient to assess the general 
population  
LIGHT TRAPS 
This meth od is useful in the quantitative 
estimation of seasonal abundance of several species 
of many moths and other insects which are attracted 
to light.  
The brood emergence of the rice stem borer 
Scirpophaga incurtulas is fixed by light trap 
catches. 
 
SUCTION TRAP 
CBG-IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 
74 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
 In this method the flying insects are trapped by 
sucking air in to some form of trap with a suction 
apparatus operated either by hand or by means of a 
motor. With timing mechanism it is possible to 
have hourly catches.  
 
ADHESIVE OR STICKY TRAPS 
 A s uitable persistent adhesive material like 
grease, tar etc. which will not dry out is spread on 
strips of paper and supported on a cylinder.  Such 
sticky traps are set in fields and flying insects are 
trapped in them. The factors like wind velocity, 
temperature, colour of the trap etc. have a bearing 
on the number of insects caught in such traps.  It is 
also necessary to collect and clean the traps often, 
otherwise the efficiency of the trap may go down.  
 
 
 
BAIT TRAPS 
 Many materials varying from raw plant 
materials and crushed insects to refined 
chemicals attractants which stimulate sexual 
odors or food odors are known to attract 
insects.  These materials are used as baits in 
special types of traps made for the purpose 
depending on the insect species to be trapped.   
 Insects (termite)  
 Snails (Metaldehyde) 
 Rats (Zinc phosphide, Bromadiolone) 
 
WATER PAN METHOD 
In this method a wide mouthed plastic container 
is used with water.  Few drops of detergent or 
teepol is added to reduce the surface tension and for 
easy settling of insects at the bottom of the 
container.  The plastic container with water is taken 
to the bottom of rice plant and the hills are tapped 
three times enabling the insects etc to fall inside the 
pan. It is  repeated in ten different hills and the 
insects thus collected are be separated out as pests 
and defenders.  This method is useful for the insects 
which feed at the basal portion of rice plant.  
 
PLANT SHAKE METHOD 
 A white paper is kept underneath the plant and 
shaking of the branches is done. 
 The insects falling from the plant are identified 
and sampled.  
 
What to record on data sheet? 
 Season 
 Crop 
 Variety/Hybrid name 
 DOS/DOT 
 Stage 
 Period 
 Date 
 Weather condition 
 Name of the farmer 
 Soil condition 
 Soil Type 
 Previous history (if any) 
 Previous crop 
 Pests and bio -agents observed (its stage, count 
per unit)  
 Diseases 
 Weeds 
 Rodent infestation 
 
B. DISEASE ASSESSMENT  
 Determination / measurement of plant disease 
incidence or intensity 
 
Objectives 
 For taking up timely management practices 
 To assess disease resistance  
 To assess crop losses 
 
Incidence 
 No. of plant units infected and expressed as 
percentage to total units examined, e.g. wilt 
 
Severity 
 Area of plant tissue affected  and expressed as 
percentage to total units examined 
 

CBG-IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 
75 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
DISEASE ASSESSMENT KEYS: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. SAMPLING FOR NEMATODES 
Sampling and extracting of nematodes serves two 
purposes  
 Diagnosis a current problem 
 Predict a future problem 
 
Sampling can be carried out at random or 
systematically.  
Depends on kind of plant: 
1- Soil sampling   
2- Plant sampling 
 
Soil Sampling 
Prior to sampling a field plot may be divided 
into strips or blocks  
 Systematic at equally -spaced point according 
(Zigzag manner) 
 
 At equally -spaced points along a line running 
diagonally across a field (crossing the field at 
middle) 
 
 Sample tree crops on alternate sides of the 
trunks and include feeder roots 
 
 
Sampling pattern: 
 If plants are not present, sample in the row 
 If plants are present, sample just outside the 
row 
 Take 4-5 cores to make a composite soil 
samples 

CBG-IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 
76 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
 
 Collect sample from:  
  *roots 
  *leaves 
  *stems 
  * buds & flowers 
  * fruits 
  *seeds  
 Timing:  
  *at seedling 
  * flowering 
  * fruiting 
  *maturation stage 
 
Material for sampling 
 Never uproot plants or tak e soil samples by 
hand 
 Soil sampling tube (15-20 cm) 
 Soil auger (more than20 cm)  
 Spade or garden trowel 
 Label each sample directly on the bag with a 
permanent marker, including field location, 
date, tillage history and rainfall to-date. 
 Don’t leave bagged  samples out in the sun. If 
necessary, store in a cool, dry place. 
 Pack samples in a cooler for transport or an 
insulated box for shipping. 
 Speed is essential – ship as soon as possible. 
 
D. RODENTS SURVEY 
- Sighting the actual damage/loss 
- Live burrow counts 
- Census baiting 
- Trapping 
 
 
 
 
 
LIVE BURROW INDEX 
 Plug all burrows in the evening hours. 
 Observe and count  the next morning  reopened 
burrows per unit area (called as live/active 
burrows) 
 Burrow index:  
  0-25/ha : low 
  25-50/ha: Moderate  
  50 & above: High 
 
E. ESTIMATION OF WEEDS: 
 Visual estimation is followed by taking quick 
look at the entire field to have an idea of weeds in 
different parts of the field. Also vigour and growth 
of main crop and the weeds are taken. Emphasis 
must be given on an unbias ed estimate. This survey 
can be combined with the other crop pest - diseases 
survey. Samples must be taken away from the main 
roads. At least 3-10 samples should be taken for an 
hectare area. The samples should be taken with the 
help of 1m x 1m quadrant. We eds must be 
identified, counted, recorded in proforma. 
Unidentified weeds should be collected preserved 
for further action. Broad leaved, grasses, sedges etc 
are accordingly separated.  
 
The field sampling technique for weeds:  
  To understand the impact of weeds on a habitat, 
weed infestations can be sampled and possibly 
mapped. To manage the weeds, sampling and 
mapping give valuable information on what IPM 
tactics will be used and when to use. 
 The goal of sampling is to get an accurate 
estimation of the  potential weed population in a 

CBG-IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 
77 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
given area. The sampling technique must 
adequately represent the whole area. For example, 
in a field,  do not just sample on the edge of the 
field because this would give you an inaccurate 
estimate of what is going on in the  whole field. 
Mapping of where exactly the weeds are may allow 
you to spot treat rather than do something on the 
whole field. 
 Your goal in sampling must be understanding 
of the species composition of an area or gaining 
information in order to make managem ent 
decisions. The type of sampling used will depend 
on what you want to know and what environment 
you are sampling in. For example, for farm 
situations, there are established "economic 
thresholds" of tolerance for weeds. Above that 
level, the weeds will c ost the farmer money if he 
does not do something to knock them back.  
 
Learning Objectives: 
 Try and compare sampling techniques for weeds 
 Learn plant identification 
 Learn factors involved in management decisions 
based on sampling information 
 Discover the c oncepts of species diversity and 
distribution within habitats 
 
Materials Needed: 
• paper and/or data sheets 
• long tape measures to set up transects 
• meter square 
• weed identification books or charts 
• hand lens 
• zip lock bags if specimens are to be brought 
back for identification 
 
Timeline: 
Depends upon how in -depth study has to  done. 
Whether several class periods, or partial or all day 
field activity. 
 
Procedures: 
1- Select several locations where sampling of 
weeds has to be done.  
2- Lay out a transect across the env ironment and 
predetermine at what distance intervals one will 
stop and sample. 
3- Transect method - at each predetermined point 
on the transect, stop and write down the plant 
species touching or closest to each side of the 
tape at the stopping point. Do this until all 
points are sampled. 
4- Quadrat square method - go back and stop 
again at the same points. This time, set the 
corner of the quadrat square down at the 
stopping point parallel to the tape. Inside the 
square, see how many different plant species 
you ca n find. List them. Make an estimate of 
what percent of the ground within the quadrat is 
covered by each of the species. Determine if the 
plant species are evenly distributed or clumped. 
 
Data collection: 
Transect method  - list species found at each 
interval as described above. You can also take 
measurements like plant height, stage of growth or 
other factors that are relevant in that habitat. 
Quadrat method  - list all plant species found 
inside quadrate with % cover 
 
IDENTIFICATION OF DISEASES, PESTS, WEEDS, NATURAL ENEMIES IN DIFFERENT CROPS 
 
Insect-Pests of Paddy 
         
Thrips (Nymph & Adult)   Green Leaf Hopper  Rice case worm symptom & its larvae 
 

CBG-IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 
78 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
         
Paddy stem borer attack & its egg mass     Swarming Caterpillar (L,P,A) 
 
         
Rice Skipper symptoms, its larvae & Adult Gall    Midge  short horned grass hopper 
 
 
Rice leaf folder symptoms  its larvae & adult) 
 
 
Rice Hispa symptoms, its larvae & adult 
 
 
BPH                 WBPH                   Mealy bug 
 
        Gundhi bug                Whorl maggot (A,L) 
 
Diseases of Paddy 
    
Sheath blight       Bacterial blight      Rice Blast 
  
sheath rot   Tungro 
 
Major weeds of paddy crop 
 

CBG-IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 
79 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
 
Echinochloa colona 
 
Echinochloa glabrescens 
 
Echinochloa crusgalli 
 
Ageratum conyzoides 
 
Amaranthus spinosus 
 
Fimbristylis miliaceae 
 
Cyperus difformis 
 
Cyperus iria  
 
Pests & Diseases of cotton 
  
Jassid    Aphid 
 
White fly  Thrips  Mealy Bug 
 
 
American bollworm Pink bollworm    Spotted  
bollworm 
 
 
Spodoptera. litura 
 
    
Semi looper  Black arm   wilt 
 
    
 
   
Damping off     Alternaria leaf spot 
 
Anthracnose  Cercospora leaf spot 

CBG-IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 
80 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
 
Grey Mildew    Leaf curl 
  
Root knot   Sting nematode 
 
Wheat diseases and pests      
 
Yellow rust  Karnal bunt 
 
Brown rust 
 
 
Common bunt  Fusarium head blight 
 
 
 
Loose smut  Bacterial streak 
 
Powdery mildew  wheat aphid 
 
Annexure-I 
RICE SURVEY FIELD CARD 
(MODEL) 
Survey routes: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
State:_____________________________ 
Reporters:_________________Date:__________ 
 
I - Location Details 
Field & Mile stone no.      Remarks 
Village        
Block       
District       
II – General Information  * 
CBG-IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 
81 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
*   Use following codes for recording general information  
Variety: Local (1); Hybrid (2) 
 
Planting Method: Broadcasting (1); Transplanting (2) 
 
Variety       
DOS/DOT       
Crop stage        
Crop Appearance       
Water       
Weather       
Weeds       
Deficiency       
III - Pests** 
Leaf Folder        
Stem Borer       
Rice Hispa       
Green Leaf Hopper       
Gall Midge       
Case worm       
Grasshopper       
BPH       
WBPH       
Whorl maggot       
Others 1       
            2       
            3       
Rats Live burrows (number)       
IV- Defenders: ***  
Spiders       
Coccinellids       
Damsel/Dragon fly       
Carabid       
Staphylinid       
Mirid bug       
Tetrastichus Egg parasites       
Telenomus       
Bracon       
Ichneumonids       
Pathogens       
Others  1       
2       
3       
V- Diseases** 
Sheath blight       
Sheath rot       
Rice blast       
False smut       
Brown spot       
Bacterial blight       
Tungro       
Others 1       
2       
3       
CBG-IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 
82 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
Crop Stage: Seedling (1); Tillering (2); Booting (3); Heading (4); Flowering (5); Milky (6); Dough (7); Matured 
(8) 
 
Crop appearance: Healthy (1); Yellowing (2); Browning (3); Dead (4) 
 
Water:  Flooded (1); Muddy (2); Dry (3) 
 
Weather: Sunny (1): Cloudy (2); Drizzle (3); Rainy (4) 
 
Weeds: Low (1); Moderate (2); Heavy (3) 
 
**  Observe  20 plants diagonally across the field and record the pests/diseases and BCA ( Bio -control agents) 
by using following scales:  
 
0 Nil;  Low (L)-   < 5 % damage;      Moderate (M)-   5-10 % Damage;  severe (S)  > 10% Damage 
 
*** Use following scale for recording defenders:  0- Nil;  1-  Low ;   2-  Moderate ;  3- Abundant  
 
Annexure-II 
 
SUGARCANE SURVEY FIELD CARD (MODEL) 
Survey routes: 
(i)                    (ii)                           (iii)             (iv) 
State:_____________________________ 
Reporters:___________                      Date:_______ 
 
I - Location Details 
Field & Mile stone no.      Remarks 
Village        
Block       
District       
II – General Information  * 
Variety       
DOS/DOT       
Crop stage        
Crop Appearance       
Water       
Weather       
Weeds       
Deficiency       
III - Pests**  
Pyrilla       
Shoot Borer(Early/Top etc)       
Stem borer       
White fly       
Aphids       
Black Bug       
Mites        
Scale       
Termites / White grub       
Mealy Bug       
Black bug       
CBG-IPM: Pest surveillance and monitoring 
83 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management  
 
Others 1       
            2       
           3       
Rats Live burrows (no.)       
 
 
*   Use following codes for recording general information  
Variety: Local (1); Hybrid (2);  
Crop Stage: Seedling (1); Tillering (2); Cane Formation (3); Maturity (4) 
 
Crop apearance: Healthy (1); Yellowing (2);  
 
Water: Flooded (1); Muddy (2); Dry (3) 
 
Weather: Sunny (1): Cloudy (2); Drizzle (3); Rainy (4) 
 
Weeds:  Low (1); Moderate (2); Heavy (3) 
 
**  Observe  randomly the field and record the pests/diseases & BCA(Bio-control agents) by using scales:  
0 Nil;  Low (L)-   < 5 % damage;      Moderate (M)-   5-10 % Damage;  severe (S)  > 10% Damage  
*** Use following scale for recording defenders:  0- Nil;  1-  Low ;   2-  Moderate ;  3- Abundant  
       
Tetrastichus Egg parasites       
Telenomus       
Bracon       
Ichneumonids       
Pathogens       
Others  1       
2       
3       
4       
V- Diseases** 
Red Rot       
Leaf Spot       
Grassy shoot       
Leaf blight       
Mosaic       
Scald       
Whip smut       
Others 1       
2       
3       
4       
IV- Defenders: ***  
Spiders       
Coccinellids       
Damsel/Dragonfly       
Carabid       
Staphylinid       
Mirid bug       
CBG-IPM: Weed ecology & Management 
84 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
WEED ECOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT 
 
1. Introduction 
 Weed is a plant growing where it is not desired. 
Weed is an unwanted plant in a specific crop 
ecosystem. Weeds are the serious pest and a major 
impediment in production of field crops through 
their ability to compete for resources viz. Nutrients, 
light, space, water , air and their adverse impact on 
product quality. The losses due to weed infestation 
vary from crop to crop and depend mainly on type 
of weed species and their intensity. According to an 
estimate the losses due to weeds account nearly one 
third i.e.33%, diseases 26%, insects 20%, storage 
pest 7%, rodents 6%  and other pests 8% of total 
crop losses1. Weeds are responsible for heavy yield 
losses to almost every important agricultural crop to 
the extent of complete crop loss under extreme 
conditions. 
In India  increased agricultural productivity is 
needed to meet the  increasing needs of the growing 
population. Proper weed management technologies , 
if adopted can result in an additional crop 
production. As the weed problems  are multi -
pronged, a holistic multi -disciplinary integrated 
approach would be imperative. In this  context, 
integrated weed management (IWM) may provide a 
more sustainable crop production by combating 
weed menace effectively, economically and 
ecologically. 
Weeds are harmful in many ways, such as: 
 Reduction in crop yield and production 
efficiency,  
 Reduce produce quality, 
 Adversely affect the soil productivity 
 Weeds harbour insect pests and diseases,  
 Obstruct the flow of water in irrigation channels 
and fields,  
 Contamination of water bodies,  
 Menace to human and animal health,  
 Damage to industry and public utilities,  
 Deterioration of aesthetics, and  
 Reduction in farmers’ income.  
 
2. Classification of Weeds  
2.1 According to Life Cycle: 
 
2.1.1 Annual Weeds:  They complete their life 
cycle within one year or one season. 
a) Rainy Annuals: They appear with the onset of 
monsoon (June -July) and complete their life cycle 
before rainy season is over (Oct/Nov) e.g. Barnyard 
grass ( Echinochloa crusgalli,  E. colonum ), False 
daisy ( Eclipta alba ), Crab grass ( Digitaria 
sanguinallis) etc. 
 
 
Echinochloa colona2 
 
Echinochloa crusgalli3 
 
Eclipta alba4 
 
b) Winter Annuals:  They complete their life cycle 
during winter season (Oct/Nov to Feb) e.g., 
Lambsquarter (Chenopodium album), Yellow sweet 
clover ( Melilotus indica ), Canary grass ( Phalaris 
CBG-IPM: Weed ecology & Management 
85 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
minor), Blue grass ( Poa annua ), Sorrels ( Rumex 
crispus) etc. 
c) Summer Annuals: They complete their life cycle 
during summer season (March to June), majority of 
the Kharif sea son weeds grow during summer 
season in irrigated farming e.g., Spurge (Euphorbia 
hirta), Pig weed (Amaranthus viridis) etc. 
d) Ephemerals:  The short -lived annual weeds are 
called ephemerals e.g., Stonebreaker ( Phyllanthus 
niruri). These weed completes thei r life cycle 
within a very short period of 2 to 4 weeks. 
 
2.1.2 Biennial Weeds: They take at least two years 
or two seasons to complete their life cycle. They 
complete their vegetative growth in first year or 
season and produce flowers and seeds in the nex t 
year or season. e.g., Wild carrot ( Daucas carota ), 
Bold-leaf launaeae (Launaea nudicaulis) etc. 
 
2.1.3 Perennial Weeds: They grow continuously 
for more than two years or several years. Perennial 
weeds are further classified as. 
 
2.1.3.1 According to Root Syste m: Depending 
upon the depth of root system perennial weeds are 
classified as 
a. Shallow Rooted Perennials: Weeds having about 
20 to 30 cm deep root system are called shallow 
rooted perennial weeds. e.g., Bermudagrass 
(Cynodon dactylon ), Quack grass ( Agropyron 
repens). 
b. Deep Rooted Perennials:  Weeds having about 
one meter or more deep root system. e.g. Nutgrass 
(Cyperus rotundus ), Johnson grass ( Sorghum 
holepense), Acacia spp., wild ber etc.   
  
2.1.3.2 According to Mode of Reproduction: 
a. Simple Perennials: Weeds which are reproduced 
mostly by seeds: e.g, Lantana camara, Acacia spp., 
Zizyphus spp. etc. 
b. Bulbous Perennials:  Weeds which are 
propagated by underground parts like bulbs/ 
rhizomes/ tubers as well a s by seeds e.g., Purple 
Nut sedge ( Cyperus rot undus), Johnson grass 
(Sorghum halepense) etc. 
c. Creeping Perennials: These weeds are s pread 
by lateral extension of the creeping above ground 
stem or roots or by seeds. e.g., Cynodon dactylon, 
Oxalis latifolia etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
Digitaria sanguinalis5 
 
 
Chenopodium album8 
 
 
Euphorbia hirta6 
 
 
Amaranthus viridis7 
CBG-IPM: Weed ecology & Management 
86 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
2.2. According to the Habitat: Depending upon 
the place of their occurrence they can be grouped as 
under: 
2.2.1 Weeds of cropped lands: e.g. Phalaris minor, 
Chenopodium album, Echinochloa crusgalli, etc. 
2.2.2 Weeds of Pastures and grazing lands: e.g., 
Parthenium hysterophorus, Cleome viscose etc. 
2.2.3 Non -Crop Land weeds: Parthenium 
hysterophorus, Lantana camera , Cannabis sativa  
etc. 
2.2.4   Aquatic Weeds: e.g. Eichhornia crassipes , 
Salvinia sp. etc. 
2.2.5   Plantation Weeds: Cynodon dactylon , 
Parthenium hysterophorusetc. 
2.2.6   Lawn and garden weeds: Tridex 
procumbence etc. 
2.2.7   Orchard and vineyard weeds: Digiteria 
sanguinalis, Cynodon dactylon etc. 
Several weed species overlap in the above 
classification. 
2.3 According to Nature of Stem: 
2.3.1 Woody Weeds:  These are the woody and 
semi-woody rough stem shrubs and are collectively 
called bush weeds, e.g., Acacia, wild ber, Lantana 
etc. 
2.3.2 Herbaceous Weeds: These weeds have green 
and succulent st em and commonly occur on farm 
lands. e.g., Cock’s Comb, Spurge, Carrot grass etc. 
 
2.4 According to Association: 
    2.4.1 Season bound weeds: These weeds grow 
in a specific season in a year irrespective of the crop 
species cultivated. Some summer annuals or winter 
annuals are the examples of season bound weeds. In 
case of perennials, the period of their vegetative 
growth is taken as their growing season e.g. 
Johnson grass is a summer perennial weed whereas 
Creeping thistle is a winter perennial weed.  
2.4.2 Crop bound weeds : Those weeds which 
usually parasitized the host crop e.g., Dodder  
(Cascuta campestris), Broomrape ( Orobanche 
aegyptiaca) and Witch weed ( Striga angustifolia) 
etc. 
2.4.3 Crop associated weeds: These weeds are also 
crop specific but for di fferent reasons, either due to 
requirement of specific micro -climate. e.g., 
Cychorium intybus and Coronopus didymus grown 
better in shady, cool and moist habitat of lucern and 
barseem etc. or due to mimicry e.g., wild rice in 
paddy fields and wild oat in w heat crop etc. Many 
of these weeds adjust by ripening before the harvest 
of main crop. 
2.4.4 Contamination of crop seed by weed seed: 
Many weeds mature at the ripening time of crop 
and contaminate the crop seeds e.g. Phalaris minor 
seeds in wheat seeds etc. Also some weed seeds 
 
 
Phalaris minor9 
 
 
Melilotus indica10 
 
 
Poa annua11 
 
 
Rumex dentatus12 
 
CBG-IPM: Weed ecology & Management 
87 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
 
 
Phyllanthus niruri13 
 
 
Wild carrot (Daucas carota)14 
 
 
Launaea nudicaulis15 
 
 
Cynodon dactylon16 
 
 
 
Agropyron repens17 
 
Also some weed seeds like wil d onion and wild 
garlic contaminates onion and garlic seeds, 
respectively, due to their resemblance. 
 
2.5   According to the Origin of Weeds: 
2.5.1 Introduced/ Exotic / Alien 
Weeds/Anthrophytes: Many weeds move from the 
place of their origin by seeds or other parts to a new 
area and establish there and become introduces 
weeds and are called Alien or Anthrophytes. 
1. Carrot grass ( Parthenium hysterophorus)  – 
U.S.A. 
2. Silver leaf nightshade ( Solanu melaeagnifolium)- 
North America 
3. Lantana (Lantana camera): Central America 
4. Cockleber (Xanthium strumarium):  America 
5. Broomrape (Orobanche spp.)- Europe 
6. Nutgrass (Cyperus rotundus): Eurasia 
7. Water hyacinth ( Eichhornia crassipes)– Tropical 
America  
8. Johnson grass ( Sorghum helepense )-Asia and 
southern Europe 
9. Puncture vine ( Tribulu sterrestris )- Southern 
Europe 
10. Western Ragweed ( Ambrosia psilostachya) - 
North America 
 
2.5.2 Indigenous Weeds: Origin of majority of 
tropical weeds has been India e.g., Cock’s comb, 
Spurge, Bermuda grass, Amaranthus spp. etc. 
2.6 Facultative and Obligate Weeds: Weeds 
which grow primarily in undistributed or close 
communities but may sometimes escape to the 
cultivated fields are facultative weeds. It is also 
called Apophytes e.g., Cactus. Whereas, w eeds 
which grow or occur primarily in cultivated field 
where the land is distributed frequently are known 
as obligate weeds. e.g., Field bind weed 
(Convolvulus arvensis). 
2.7 Noxious Weeds:  The weeds which are 
undesirable, troublesome and difficult to control are 
CBG-IPM: Weed ecology & Management 
88 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
called noxious we eds e.g. Nut grass, Bermuda 
grass, Carrot grass, Striga, Orobanche, Water 
hyacinth etc. 
2.8 Objectionable Weeds: Weeds which produce 
seeds that are difficult to separate once mixed with 
crop seeds are called objectionable weeds e.g., 
mixture of Maxican pop py ( Argemone Mexicana)  
seeds in mustard and wild onion ( Asphodelus 
tenuifolius) in cultivated onion etc. 
2.9 Industrials Weeds: Weeds invading areas 
around buildings, highway, railway lines, fence 
rows, electric and telephone pole bases etc. are 
called ind ustrial weeds e.g., Parthenium 
hysterophorus, Cynodon dactylon, Digiteria 
sanguinalis etc. 
 
 
Cyperus rotundus18 
 
 
Sorghum halepense19 
 
Lantana camera20 
 
 
Oxalis latifolia21 
 
 
Cleome viscose22 
 
 
Eichhornia crassipes23 
 
 
Salvinia molesta24 
 
CBG-IPM: Weed ecology & Management 
89 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
 
Circium arvense25 
 
 
Imperata cylindrica26 
 
 
Saccharum spontaneum27 
 
Cuscuta campestris28 
 
 
Orobanche aegyptiaca29 
 
 
Striga angustifolia 30 
 
 
Argimone maxicana 
 
 
Convolvulus arvensis31 
CBG-IPM: Weed ecology & Management 
90 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
 
 
Parthenium hysterophorus 
 
 
Cassia tora 
 
 
Achyranthes aspera32 
  
    
 
 
  
Ambrosia psylostechia  a. plant and b. infested 
plantation crops in Tumkur district of 
Karnataka, India (Source: CIPMC, Bengaluru) 
 
2.10 Poisonous Weeds:  Some weed plants are 
poisonous/allergic etc. e.g. Parthenium 
hysterophorus, Poison ivy (Rhuss sp.) etc. 
 
3. Weed Ecology:  
Weed Ecology is the interrelationship between 
weed and their environment. It is concerned with 
growth characteristics and adaptations that enable 
weeds to survive the changes in the environment. 
The environment includes climatic, ed aphic and 
biotic factors and it determines the distribution, 
prevalence, competing ability, behaviour and 
survival of the weeds. Persistence of a weed is 
largely influenced by climatic, edaphic (soil) and 
biotic factors which affect its occurrence, 
abundance, range and distribution. 
 
3.1  Climatic factors: 
The important climatic factors of the environment 
that affect persistence of weeds are light, 
temperature, rainfall, wind and humidity. 
Light intensity, quality and duration are important 
in influencing the g rowth, reproduction and 
distribution of weeds. Photoperiod governs 
flowering and  time of seed setting and maturation 
and also has impact on the evolution of various 
ecotypes within a weed species.  
Soil temperature  affects seed germination and 
dormancy which is a major survival mechanism of 
weeds. The winter survival of underground parts 
(rhizomes, bulbs, tubers and roots) of perennial 
CBG-IPM: Weed ecology & Management 
91 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
weeds is very much dependant on their resistance to 
extreme temperatures in the soil. 
Rainfall and water  have a significant  effect on 
weed persistence and distribution. The distribution 
pattern of rain is a determining factor in utilization 
of water supply by the plant, since water shortages 
at critical stages of growth are often responsible for 
failure of reproduction and survival.  
Wind velocity, frequency and direction may also 
restrict or limit the occurrence and persistence of 
weeds. Wind plays a role in stabilizing oxygen and 
carbon dioxide balance in the atmosphere. It also 
modifies the transpiration losses from all the plants.  
 
3.2  Soil factors: 
Soil factors which influence weed persistence are 
soil water, aeration, temperature, pH , fertility level, 
and also cropping system. 
The ideal pH for most plants to grow range s from 
6.2 to 7.3 .  This is the range where nutrients are  
most available for uptake by the roots of plants.  
Some weed species are characteristically ‘alkali’ 
plants, also known as basophiles (pH range 7.4 to 
8.5)  which can grow well in alkali soils , e.g., 
Alkaligrass ( Puccinallia spp.) and quackgrass 
(Agropyron repens) Some w eed species like 
Cynodon dactylon, Digitaria sanguinalis and 
Borreria spp. habitat only in acidic soils(pH range 
4.5 to 6.5)called Acedophiles. A shift in soil pH, for 
example, towards acid side due to continuous use of 
ammonium sulphate as a nitrogen source could also 
cause a shift in the weed spectrum.  
Several species of compositae and polygonaceae  
grow well in saline soils. These weeds serve as 
indicator plants. Some weed species like 
Commelina benghalensis thrive well in moist soil 
condition while the perennial grass like Imperata 
cylindrica, Agropyron repens etc. persist even in 
drought conditions. Weeds like Typha spp. live only 
in waterlogged soils.  
 
3.3  Biotic factors: 
Plants and animals are the biotic factors that modify 
the growth in a  variety of ways that affect weed 
persistence directly and indirectly. In a cropping 
situation, the major effects on we eds are those 
exerted by the crop as it competes for available 
resources like nutrients, light, space and water . 
Once certain weed specie s are introduced, their 
persistence in a given crop is determined largely by 
the degree of competition offered by the crop. Th e 
competitive ability of a weed  and its persistence 
depends upon its vegetative habit, readiness of seed 
germination, rate of seed ling growth and the extent 
and nature of root and top growth. Besides, the 
agricultural practices associated with the crop 
grown may encourage or discourage specific weeds. 
Crops that serve as host to parasitic weeds and 
crop-induced stimulants and toxin (allelopathy) are 
also example of other biotic factors.  
Many factors influence the presence and abundance 
of weed species o n groups of weeds in fields. 
Important factors include: method of sowing, soil 
moisture, crop rotation, type and amount of 
fertilizers applied, time of fertili zers application, 
cultivar, water management; crop management and 
weed control methods used. These factors influence 
the weed growth and subsequently the productivity 
and quality  of crop produce . These factors are 
manageable to pr ovide optim um crop stand and 
create microenvironment in favour of crop plants. 
 
4. Survival Mechanisms of Weeds:  
The seed is the primary means of survival 
mechanism of annual weeds. The vegetative plant 
propagules such as buds, rhizomes, tubers, bulbs 
and stolons offer an additional survival mechanism 
for perennial weeds. The major adaptations for 
survival of weeds include prolific seed production, 
survival of vegetative propagules under adverse 
conditions, seed dissemination and dormancy, and 
ability of s eeds and propagules to resist any 
detrimental effects of environment. Of these, 
dormancy is probably the single most important 
characteristics of weed that enable them survive 
when crops cannot.  
4.1 Seed Production: 
Seed production is the sole means of propag ation 
and survival of annual and biennial weeds while 
perennial weed are less dependent on this 
mechanism. A single plant of an annual weed can 
produce enough seeds in one season to cover an 
entire area of one acre with same weed species in 
the next year. For example, redroot pigweed 
(Amaranthus retroflexus), purslane ( Portula 
caoleracea) and black nightshade ( Solanum 
nigrum) produce approximately 196,405; 193,213 
and 178,000 seeds per plant, respectively. Wild oats 
(Avena fatua) germinate at the same time , the crop 
was shown but shatter their mature seeds before 
crop harvest operations33.  
4.2 Seed Dissemination:  
Most weeds are good travellers. They use various 
forces or agents to transport and scatter themselves 
from place to place. Of all the agents by which  
weeds are disseminated, wind, water, animals and 
man play important roles. 
a. Wind: Many weeds seeds have 
modifications or adaptations e.g. , saccate, winged 
comate, parachute and plumed  which aid them in 
getting scattered by the wind. Seeds or small fruits 
with tufts of hair or wing -like appendages are 
carried by the wind over long distances; the lighter 
seeds may drift for miles. The achnes of dandelions, 
CBG-IPM: Weed ecology & Management 
92 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
thistles and species of compositae floating in the air 
on a windy day are a common sight. Similarly, the  
seeds of Imperata cylindrica and Saccharaum 
spontaneum are carried away by wind to faraway 
places.  
b. Water: Many weed seeds are light or are 
covered with an oily film so that they float on the 
surface of water. Such seeds are frequently washed 
into the str eams by surface run -off during heavy 
rains or they are picked up by overflowing streams 
and are carried to other fields lower down the 
valley. 
c. Animals: Weed seeds are also 
disseminated by animals. Many seeds pass through 
the digestive tracts of animals wit hout loss of 
viability. Birds also consume large quantities of 
weed seeds and scatter them in droppings. The 
dispersal of seeds in the form of incompletely 
digested materials passing through the animals is 
termed as ‘endozoochory’. Seeds also stick to the 
fur, feathers and muddy feet of birds and animals 
and are carried from place to place. This method of 
dissemination is, however, not as important as the 
other means. 
d. Man: Seeds of many weed species have 
specialized structure like hooks, spines, barbs and 
awns which tend to cling to man’s clothing and foot 
wear or agricultural implements used by man. 
Fruits of Tribulus terrestris have sharp spines 
which cling to animals and man and get dispersed 
far and wide. Achyranthus aspera and Chrysopoga 
aciculatus have awns which get disseminated by 
sticking to man’s clothing. Weed seeds are carried 
in packing materials and in soil and sand or gravel 
used in construction. Man often carries weed seeds 
of interest from one part of the country to the other 
and from one cou ntry to another. The movement of 
commercial seeds and grain is an important means 
of weed seed dispersal by man, e.g. , widespread 
occurrence of Phalaris minor is because of its seeds 
contaminated the wheat grain imported in the 
1960’s.  
 
4.3 Seed Germination:  
Germination is a critical factor in the establishment 
of weed infestation. For germination, seeds of both 
crops and weeds must have adequate soil moisture, 
favourable temperature and a supply of oxygen. 
Weed seeds, however, possess a variety of special 
germination mechanisms adapted to changes in 
temperature, soil moisture, aeration, exposure to 
light, depth of burial of seeds etc. When conditions 
are unfavourable for germination, they can remain 
dormant or delay germination.  
Seeds of many weeds require a n exposure to light 
for germination. This is regulated by bluish -green 
protein pigment called phytochrome. Germination 
of the seeds of Lactuca (lettuce), Xanthium 
(cocklebur), Lepidium (pepper weed) and Rumex 
(sorrels) genera is controlled by phytochrome33. 
Many weeds germinate under aerobic conditions 
while some require anerobic conditions. Soil turn 
during ploughing and other land preparation 
operations exposes the seeds to light and induces 
germination.  
Summer annuals favour higher temperatures for 
germination and one can see flushes of weed 
seedlings when temperature  reaches at favourable 
levels. Winter annuals  germinate at lower 
temperature and shorter days in the autumn and 
winter seasons. Some weeds can germinate freely 
throughout the year. Viability is an integral and 
major part of weed infestation.  
4.4. Seed Dormancy:  
Dormancy is a state in which viable seed fails to 
germinate in spite of favourable conditions of 
moisture, temperature and oxygen for plant growth. 
It is a survival mechanism of weed s. Further, when 
the conditions for germination are not favourable, 
seeds can become dormant. Seeds of weed species 
of Boraginaceae, Convo lvulaceae, Cucurbitaceae, 
Leguminasae and Poaceae have long dormancy 
period often running into several years.  
Types of seed dormancy: 
a. Inherent or innate dormancy: It is due to 
the genetically controlled characters in  the plant 
species, e.g., hard seed coats in Setaria and 
Xanthium spp. 
b. Induced dormancy: It develops when the 
non-dormant seed becomes dormant after exposure  
to sp ecific environmental conditions  e.g., rise in 
temperature / CO 2 content in soil, low O 2 pressure, 
water logging etc. e.g. Avena ludoviciana seeds. 
c. Enforced dormancy : It is a non -specific 
character and it develops when limitations of the 
habitat or en vironment prevent non -dormant viable 
seeds from germinating and germination occurs 
only w hen the limitations are removed e.g. deep 
placement of seeds, when such seeds restored to the 
top 3 -5 cm of soil during ploughing, the seeds 
germinate. Absence of red light to some seeds a lso 
leads to enforced dormancy e.g., Avena ludoviciana 
seeds. 
 
5. Weed competition: 
The degree of weed competition is determined by 
the weed species infesting the area, density of 
infestation and duration of infestation. Weed 
species differ among themselves in their competing 
ability e.g., Monochoria vaginalis is more severe 
competitor than Echinochloa crusgalli in rice 
culture. Similarly, Avena fatua was foun d more 
competitive in wheat than Setaria viridis. 
 
CBG-IPM: Weed ecology & Management 
93 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
5.1 Critical period of crop weed competition  
This is most important time period for Integrated 
Pest Management. The critical period for weed 
control is a period in the crop growth cycle during 
which weeds must be controlled to prevent yield 
losses. Critical period of crop weed comp etition 
observed in India  w.r.t. various crops are given 
below: 
Table 1: General Critical period of crop weed 
competition for different important crops grown 
in India34 & 35 
Crops Critical 
Period (DAS)* 
A. Cereals 
Rice (Direct Seeded) 15-45 
Rice (Transplanted) 30-45 
Wheat 30-45 
Maize 15-45 
Sorghum 15-45 
Pearl millet 30-45 
B. Pulses  
Pigeon pea 15-60 
Green gram 15-30 
Black gram 15-30 
Cowpea 15-30 
Chickpea 30-60 
Peas 30-45 
Lentil 30-60 
C. Oilseeds  
Soybean 20-45 
Groundnut 40-60 
Sunflower 30-45 
Castor 30-60 
Safflower 15-45 
Sesamum 15-45 
Rapeseed-mustard 15-40 
Linseed 20-45 
D. Commercial crops  
Sugarcane 30-120 
Potato 20-40 
Cotton 15-60 
Jute 30-45 
E. Vegetable crops  
Cauliflower 30-45 
Cabbage 30-45 
Okra 15-30 
Tomato 30-45 
Onion 30-75 
F. Spices  
Cumin 20-40 
* DAS= Days after sowing/planting 
 
6. Principles of Weed Management: 
The principles that underline ecologically and 
economically viable weed management system are: 
(a) Adopting the weed manage ment options that 
suits to the environment of the region, including 
soil, water, climate and biotypes present at the site 
and (b) Optimizing the use of cultural, biological, 
physical, mechanical and chemical resources for 
effective management of weeds. An important 
principle underlying long -term weed management 
is that weed seed banks decides the emergent weeds 
population, and therefore, seed banks must be 
managed at low densities to reduce the potential 
build-up of high weed populations. 
 
7. Integrated Weed Management (IWM) 
IWM is a science -based decision -making process 
that coordinates the use of  environmental 
information, weed biology and ecology, and all 
available technologies to control weeds by the most 
economical means, while posing the least possible  
risk to people and the  environment. Effective IWM 
combines prev entive, cultural, mechanical,  
biological and chemical weed control methods in an 
effective, economical and ecological manner. 
Weed management must aim at reducing the weed 
population to a level at which weeds occurrence has 
no effect on farmers’ economic and ecological 
interests. By using different  appropriate 
management practices against weeds, farmers have 
more options for controlling  weeds, thereby 
reducing the possibility of escapes and weed 
adaptation to any single weed management tactic.  
7.1 Preventive: 
Weed prevention includes the measures to deny 
entry and establishment of new weeds in area. It 
includes (a) use of weed- free crop seeds , (b) seed 
certification (c) avoid contamination ma nure pits 
(d) prevent movement of weeds with other farm 
sources (e)  by weed laws and  (f) by quarantine 
laws. 
7.2 Cultural 
7.2.1 Crop rotations: Crop rotation is an important 
component of IWM. The choice and sequencing of 
crops affects long-term weed population  dynamics, 
and consequently weed management. In traditional  
farming, rotations comprised of crops with different 
life cycles are a key component of weed  
management. Different planting and harvest dates 
among these crops provide more opportunities  for 
farmers to prevent either plant establishment or 
seed production by weeds. 
7.2.2 Soil Solarization: 
Soil Solarization is a very simple technique of 
mulching the soil with transparent polyethylene 
sheet, especially when the soil has high moisture 
content during summer so as to trap more solar heat 
in the surface soil to raise the soil temperature to 
the level lethal to soil borne pests including weeds, 
pathogens and nematodes etc. During mulching 
CBG-IPM: Weed ecology & Management 
94 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
transparent polyethylene sheets should be buried on 
all the sides. Irrigation treatment should be given by 
flooding one day before mulching. It favours the 
soil heating and increases the mean maximum soil 
temperature by about 9 0C at 5 cm depth and 7 0C at 
10-15 cm depth. Duration of 4 -6 weeks of Soil 
Solarization is ideal for ac hieving the excellent 
results for rainy and winter seasons both and 
provides control of Trienthema portulacastrum, 
Dactyloctenium aegyptium, Digera arvensis, 
Echinochloa colonum, Eleusine indica in rainy 
season and Avena ludoviciana, Phalaris minor , 
Chenopodium album , Rumex dentatus, Fumaria 
parviflora in winter season 36. In our country higher 
temperature prevails during the months of May -
June. Simultaneously, there is very less cropping 
activities in these months at farmers’ fields which 
provides a good op portunity for controlling the 
weeds, pathogens and nematodes etc. for a longer 
period by soil solarization which is an eco-friendly 
technique. However, soil solarisation should be 
selected on the basis of critical analysis of soil 
ecosystem as it contains several beneficial 
organisms which may also be affected. 
7.2.3 Tillage: Tillage prior to crop establishment 
serves mainly to prepare a weed free seed bed. It  
eliminates established and emerged weeds prior to 
crop seeding and also moves weed seeds below the 
soil surface vertically, resulting in weed seed burial. 
It is suggested that an integrated weed  management 
strategy involving summer ploughing and inter-crop 
cultivation are essential for effective weed control 
in direct -sown, flood -prone, lowland rice, i n order 
to ensure higher N -use ef ficiency and crop 
productivity. 
7.2.4 Stale seed bed: A stale seed-bed is one where 
a flush  of weeds are destroyed before planting of 
any crop. Most weed seeds germinate from top 4 to 
5 cm of surface soil. If a finally prep ared seed-bed 
is withheld from planting and it contains adequate 
moisture in its top 4 to 5 cm of soil, a flush of 
young weed seedlings will grow on it in about a 
week’s time. These weed seedlings can be 
destroyed either with shallow non -inverting tillage 
implement like, spike -tooth harrow /spring -tooth 
harrow / corrugated iron land roller /  weeder-
mulcher / sweeps. Depending upon the time 
available, one or two flushes of weeds can be 
destroyed in this manner before planting crops in 
the stale seed -beds. Th e main advantage of stale 
seed-beds is that crops germinate in weed -free 
environment. Stale seed -beds can be highly 
effective in controlling weeds in crops planted in a 
rain-free per iod with the help of irrigation  e.g. 
berseem, l ucern, potato etc. in India . However, i n 
rainy season, an odd shower may make stale seed -
beds to o compact to plant crops without further 
tillage of the land. Besides, rainy weather will 
transplant many weed seedlings dislodged during 
the preparation of the stale seed-beds.  
7.2.5Crop competitiveness : Using high yielding 
crop variet ies which are more competitive against 
weeds in combination with other methods of weed 
control is one of the most economical approaches to 
attain optimal crop yield. 
7.2.6 Crop mulching: Covering or mulchin g the 
soil surface can reduce weed problems by 
preventing weed seed  germination or by 
suppressing the growth of emerging weed 
seedlings. Mulches can be made from a  number of 
materials: a living plant ground cover  (e.g. 
sugarcane trash) , loose particles of organic or 
inorganic matter  spread over soil, and sheets of 
artificial or natural materials laid on the soil 
surface. 
7.2.7 Time of sowing: In some crops early sowing 
have the advantage in favour of crop to suppress the 
weeds, (e.g., Wheat) to compete  with weeds that 
germinate later. 
7.2.8 Row spacing: Row width may be reduced in 
some crops so that leaf canopy covers the soil faster 
and sheds out the weeds. However, closer spacing 
between rows should be balanced with keeping 
rows wide enough for hoeing/inte r-culture 
operations. 
7.2.9 Seed rate: Higher seed rate increase the crop 
plant stand and cover the soil early to shed out the 
weeds within rows, e.g. wheat, soybean etc.  
7.2.10 Zero tillage:  The use of zero tillage would 
also reduce the costs of seeding.  In rice -wheat 
system, under zero tillage, the time taken between 
rice harvest and wheat sowing is considerably 
shortened and  early sowing of wheat after rice 
results in better early crop growth to supress the 
weeds and increase the wheat yield. 
If weed se ed production was minimized during the 
growing season, weed seedling emergence in no-till 
would decline across the years compared with tilled 
systems as the surface weed seed pool in no-till will 
depleted more rapidly by emergence and mortality. 
Burial of weed seeds in soil by tillage favours 
persistence across time, thus leading to more weed 
seedlings in later years. Farmers can get additional 
benefits from this pattern of weed seedling 
emergence in  no-till systems when it is combined 
with crop diversity in their rotations. 
7.3 Mechanical/Physical: 
To control the weeds at early stage of crop 
establishment h and weeding is being practiced by 
farmers in India since they initiated agriculture. It is 
most effective eco-friendly weed management 
practice for annual weeds. Hand weeding is 
ineffective against perennial weeds due to their  
regenerative capability. Mechanical management of 
CBG-IPM: Weed ecology & Management 
95 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
weeds consists of using machines or human made 
tools to suppress the we eds at the young stage of 
crops e.g. hand hoeing between rows  of wheat, 
rotary-hoe / weeder -harrow in maize and soybean, 
inter-row cultivation (scuffling) by tractor drawn 
implements or bullock drawn cultivator in wider 
spacing crops like sugarcane etc. To manage the 
perennial weeds in non-crop areas, mower may also 
be used to cut down the weeds  from soil surface. 
Repeated mowing of weeds may also be practiced 
to deplete the root reserves of the perennial weeds. 
7.4 Biological: 
The Biological control of weeds comprises the use 
of living organisms to attack the specif ic weed 
population to keep it below threshold level without 
significantly affecting desirable plants. It includes 
use of insects, pathogens, nematodes, mites, 
parasitic plants and competing plants. Besides 
these, certain fish carps and snails may also be 
employed for the control of aquatic weeds.  
Historically, biological control method s have 
proved best on large infestation of a single weed 
species in range lands or in water bodies. Some 
outstanding examples of bio -control of weeds are 
the use of insect to  control Pricklypear, 
Opuntia vulgaris (synonym Opuntia monocantha ) 
naturally by cochineal insect ( Dactylopius 
indicus)in 1795 and later Opuntia dillenii by 
Dactylopius tomantosus (D. punte) after 
1926; Eichhornia crassipes, aquatic weed by weevil 
(Neochetina bruchi and N. eichhorniae) since 1982, 
control of Salvenia molesta, aquatic weed by weevil 
Cyrtobagous salviniaesince 1983-8437 & 38. 
Lantana camera, a bushy weed was also reported to 
be suppressed by tinged bug ( Teleonema 
scrupulosa) after 1940, howev er, later this was 
declared unsafe and whole test culture was 
destroyed by FRI, Dehradun; limited suppression of 
Siam weed ( Chromomolaena odorata ) in South 
India by Pareuchaetes pseudoinsulata  Srilanka 
strains in rubber plantations. Limited suppression of 
Crofton weed (Ageratina adenophora / Eupatorium 
adenophorum / E. glandulosum ) by tephrited gall 
fly ( Procecidochares utilis ) in Nilgiris (Tamil 
Nadu), Darjeeling and Kalimpong areas . Limited 
success for control of Parthenium hy sterophorus 
weed has been ach ieved by Chrysomelid beetle  
(Zygogramma bicolorata)37. There is also report of 
suppression of  Parthenium weed by more 
competitive leguminous plant Cassia tora, which is 
less harmful than Parthenium. Unfortunately, 
biological weed control has not developed to the 
point to make appreciable impact on the production 
of agronomic crops. 
However, the host specificity test and feeding 
potential of bio -control agents must also be taken 
into account while opting biological control of 
weeds. 
7.5 Allelopathy: 
The detr imental effect of natural release of 
chemical compound (exudates) of one plant on 
another plant(s) called allelopathy. These 
compounds include phenolic acids, coumarins, 
terpenoids and flavonoids. These allelopathic 
chemicals inhibits the seed germination or reduce 
the growth of other plants species. These 
compounds are released from the plants as a vapour 
or leaching from the foliage or exudates from the 
roots or during decomposition of the plant residues. 
Allelopathy in natural plant communities is a 
significant factor in maintaining the present balance 
among the various plant species. The allelopathy 
can be used to manage certain kind of weeds in the 
cropping system. e.g. , root exudates of Cirsium sp. 
is deterimental to oat plants in the field; root 
exudates of Euphorbia spp. is injurious to the flex 
plants. Quack grass rhizome exudates is also 
reported to interfere with the uptake of nutrient by 
the Maize. Similarly, allelopathic effect of some 
crop plants may explore to manage the certain weed 
infestations in the field. e.g. , isolate 1,3,7 -
Trimethylxanthine from Coffeaarabica have been 
reported to inhibit the germination of Amaranthus 
spinosus; and oat reported to have allelopathic 
effect on Chenopodium spp.33 
7.6 Flame weeding 
Flame weeding may be used f or spot weeding. Gas 
presser and ground speed may be used to control 
the heat at which the weeds are killed. Exposure to 
heat for about one tenth of the second expands the 
water in the weeds & bursting of cell walls. In 3 -4 
days weeds become brown and dead . The best 
results are obtained on hot dry days. 
7.7 Chemical herbicide 
Use of chemical herbicide  should be opted as a last 
resort for management of weeds in the field crops. 
The herbicides which are recommended by the 
CIBRC in a particular crop for contro l of specific 
weed species should only be advocated to the 
trainees / farmers. Herbicides are very selective and 
their dose, time of application, method of 
application, dilution in water, if any etc. should be 
adhere as per CIBRC claims for control of 
particular weed(s) in a particular crop. For the same 
label claims, if many herbicides formulations are 
recommended, the low a.i. dose  herbicide may be 
preferred over higher a.i. dose herbicide. The details 
of CIBRC registered herbicides formulations 
recommended on various crops  are available on the 
CIBRC website www.cibrc.gov.in.    
7.7.1 Herbicide resistance  
Continuous use of a particular herbicides in a 
particular field may led to development of 
CBG-IPM: Weed ecology & Management 
96 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
resistance in the weeds and may exuberate the weed 
problems further. For example, in rice –wheat 
cropping system of Punjab and Haryana Phalaris 
minor became the most dominant and problematic  
weed in wheat crop for which Isoproturon 
herbicides was continuously used by farmers for 
more than a decade during ninet ies and Phalaris 
minor developed resistance against isoproturon  in 
these specific areas. However, among weeds of rice, 
such resistance against  herbicides has not reported, 
yet, in India.  To avoid the development of 
resistance in a particular weed against a particular 
herbicide, use of same herbicide year after year 
should be avoided rather different recommended 
herbicides should be used on rotation basis.  
The Integrated Pest management suggests that  use 
of chemical herbicide s hould be the last resort of 
weed management in any field crop / non -crop 
areas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CBG-IPM: Weed ecology & Management 
97 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
References:  
1 Mukhopadhyay, S.K. (1992) Emerging problem 
and advances in weed management. 
Presidential address, Agricultural Section, 
Indian Science Congress, Vadodara. pp 2-3. 
2 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Echinochloa_colon
a  
3 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Echinochloa_crus-
galli  
4 http://www.astrogle.com/ayurveda/eclipta-alba-
bhringraj-benefits-and-usages.html 
5 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digitaria_sanguina
lis 
6 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euphorbia_hirta 
7 http://www.hear.org/pier/imagepages/singles/st
arr_010520_0109_amaranthus_viridis.htm 
8 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chenopodium_alb
um 
9 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phalaris_minor 
10 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Melilotus_indicus 
11 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poa 
12 http://pakflora.freshbiology.net/main/pakflora/fi
ndspp.php?spp=Rumex%20dentatus 
13 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phyllanthus_niruri 
14 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daucus_carota  
15 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Launaea 
16 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cynodon_dactylon 
17 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Agrop
yron_repens 
18 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyperus_rotundus 
19 http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/grami
noid/sorhal/all.html 
20 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lantana_camara 
21 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oxalis_latifolia 
22 http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cleome_viscosa 
23 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Eichh
ornia_crassipes 
24 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salvinia_molesta 
25 http://www.plantdex.com/index.php/weeds/261
-cirsium-arvense-creeping-thistle 
26 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imperata 
27 http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sacch
arum_spontaneum_-_Indian_Botanic Garden _-
_Howrah_2012-09-20_0174 
28 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cuscuta_campestri
s 
29 http://species.wikimedia.org/wiki/Striga_angust
ifolia 
30 http://www.tifton.uga.edu/fat/PlantParasitesPM.
htm 
31 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convolvulus_arven
sis 
32 http://08hachi.blogspot.in/2011/08/devils-
horsewhip-achyranthes-aspera-l.html 
33 Rao, V.S. (1983) Principles of weed science. 
Oxford and IBH Publishing, New Delhi. 
34 Mishra, J.S. (1997) Critical period of weed 
competition and losses due to weeds in major 
field crops. Farmer and Parliament. 33(6): 19 -
20. 
35 Kumar, Subhash (2001) Critical Period of weed 
competition in cumin ( Cuminum cyminum L.). 
Indian Journal of Weed Science . 33(1&2): 30-
33.  
36 Yaduraju, N.T. 1997. Solarization in weed 
management. In proceedings, International 
Symposium on Integrated Weed Management 
for sustainable Agriculture. Vol. I, pp 346-347.   
37 Bhan, V.M. et.al. (1998) Weed Management, 
chapter in 50 years of agronomic research     in 
India. Indian Society of Agronomy, pp 155 -
192. 
38 Gupta, O.P. (1984) Scientific Weed 
Management. Todays and Tomorrow’s Printers 
& Publishres, New Delhi. 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
98 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
MASS PRODUCTION OF Trichogramma 
sp. AND Trichogrammatoidea sp. 
 
Introduction:  
The genus Trichogramma and 
Trichogrammatoidea are cosmopolitan in 
distribution and parasitizing more than 200 species 
of Lepidoptera, Neuroptera, Diptera, Hemiptera, 
Coleoptera and Hymenoptera . Majority of 
Trichogramma and Trichogrammatoidea are 
primary parasitoids eggs of Lepidoptera  (Tanwar et 
al. 2006). It is important for plant protection 
because of its wide spread natural occurrence and 
its success as biological control age nt by mass 
releasing (Lenteren 2003). Since this parasitoid kills 
the pest in the egg stage itself before the pest could 
cause any damage to the crop and also that it is 
quite amenable to mass production in the 
laboratories, it has the distinction of being  the 
highest produced and most utilized biological 
control agent in the world. 
Trichogrammatidae includes the smallest of 
insects, ranging in size from 0.2 to 1.5 mm  
(Nagaraja, 1978) . Trichogramma are difficult to 
identify because they are so small and hav e 
generally uniform morphological characters. Also, 
certain physical characteristics such as body color 
and the number and length of body hairs can vary 
with body size, season, rearing temperature and the 
host on which the adult was reared  (Nagaraja, 
1978). 
 
 
 
 
Taxonomy, Identification and Distribution: 
A major advance in the systematics of 
Trichogramma was the discovery that 
characteristics of male genitalia can be used to 
identify species. This is the primary means of 
identification today, but body col or, wing venation 
and features of the antennae serve as supporting 
characteristics (Nagaraja & Nagarkatti, 1970; 
Viggiani, 1971). 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
99 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
Females cannot be identified with the same level 
of confidence, so collections submitted for 
identification must include males  in addition to 
physical characteristics; studies of reproductive 
compatibility and mode of reproduction also have 
been especially valuable in identifying species  
(Girault, 1915; Pinto, 2006). 
 
Distinguishing features between 
Trichogramma and Trichogrammatoidea 
(Adopted from NBAII) 
 
 
Kingdom: Animalia 
Class: Insecta 
Order: Chalcidoidea 
Family: Trichogrammatidae 
S
N 
species Host Com
mon 
crop 
Distributi
on 
1.  Trichogramma 
achaeae 
Nagaraja & 
Nagarkatti 
Egg of 
Lepidop
tera 
Field 
and 
orchar
d crop 
Cosmopo
litan  
2.  Trichogramma 
chilonis Ishii 
Egg of 
Lepidop
tera 
Field 
and 
orchar
d crop 
Cosmopo
litan  
3.  Trichogramma 
japonicum 
Ashmead 
Egg of 
Lepidop
tera 
Field 
and 
orchar
d crop 
Cosmopo
litan  
4.  Trichogramma Egg of Field Cosmopo
pretiosum 
Riley 
Lepidop
tera 
and 
orchar
d crop 
litan  
5.  Trichogramma
toidea bactrae 
Nagaraja 
Egg of 
Lepidop
tera 
Field 
and 
orchar
d crop 
Cosmopo
litan  
 
Biology of Trichogramma and 
Trichogrammatoidea  
(Adopted from Tanwar et al., 2006) 
The development of all Trichogramma spp. is 
very similar. Being an egg paras ite, the female 
drills a hole through the chorion and deposits its 
eggs within the egg of the host. The internal 
pressure of the egg forces a small drop of yolk out 
of the oviposition hole. Females feed on this yolk, 
which increases their longevity and und er 
laboratory conditions a female parasitizes from one 
to ten eggs per day or from ten to 190 during her 
life.  
Egg: The number of eggs laid per host egg may 
vary from 1 to 20 or more depending upon the size 
of the host egg. However in sugarcane, in which 
moth borer eggs are small, generally 1 or 2 
parasites develop per egg.  Large females parasitize 
more eggs than smaller females. A female 
parasitoid can distinguish already parasitised eggs, 
thereby avoiding superparasitism or multiple -
parasitism under natu ral conditions. Fecundity 
varies from 20 to 200 eggs per female according to 
the species, the host, and the longevity of the adult. 
Eggs in the early stages of development are more 
suitable for parasite development.  
Larva: During the 3rd instar (3 to 4 days after the 
host egg was parasitized) dark melanin granules are 
deposited on the inner surface of the egg chorion, 
causing the host egg to turn black. This is an 
invaluable diagnostic character for distinguishing 
them from unparasitised eggs.  
Pupa: Larvae transform to the inactive pupal stage. 
Adult: The  wasps emerge from the pupae and 
escape the host egg by chewing a circular hole in 
the egg shell. The black layer inside the chorion and 
the exit hole are evidence of parasitism by 
Trichogramma. The egg, l arval and pupal stages of 
Trichogramma at 28 ± 20C are completed in about 
1 day, 3 to 4 days, and 4 to 5 days respectively. 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
100 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
Thus, the life cycle is completed in 8 to 10 days, 
but it may be prolonged at lower temperatures or 
hampered at very high temperat ures. The adults are 
short lived (6 -8 days). Mating and oviposition take 
place immediately after emergence. The sex ratio is 
generally 1:1. 
 
Material required for Mass rearing: 
1. Corcyra cage 
2. Oviposition cage 
3. Moth collecting device 
4. Sterilization chamber 
5. Cleaning device  
6. Consumable material 
 
Mass production 
Different species and strains of Trichogramma 
typically prefer different host eggs and crop habitats 
and have different searching abilities and tolerance 
to weather conditions. Efficacy is improved b y 
selecting the most effective and adapted species or 
strain for the specific crop / pest situation. In the 
laboratory the parasitoids are multiplied on Corcyra 
eggs. The eggs laid by the Corcyra moths are 
collected and sieved to remove the moth scales etc . 
The pure eggs thus obtained are exposed to ultra -
violet light in UV chamber to kill the host embryo 
but at the same time permit parasitisation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UV Chamber 
 
 
Laminar flow 
 
 The quantity of the sterilized eggs is assessed in 
a measuring cylinder volu metrically. The eggs in 
volume of 0.5cc is then sprinkled uniformly over a 
144 gsm (chart paper) card. Label information on 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
101 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
the manufacturer, species of the parasitoid, date of 
parasitization and expected date of emergence are 
given. The size of the card i s 03cm x 1 8cm for 
0.5cc of eggs.  
 A coat of 10% gum is applied on the grids and 
the eggs are sprinkled uniformly in a single layer 
with the aid of a tea strainer.  
The excess eggs pasted are removed by gently 
passing a shoe brush over the card after suffi cient 
air drying under fan. 
 
 
  
 
Figs.___. Corcyra rearing cage outer view and Inner 
view 
 
The egg cards are placed into polythene bags of 
suitable size and the nucleus card of Trichogramma 
are introduced in it. The easiest way to accomplish 
this is to p lace a piece of ‘ Tricho egg card’ 
containing parasitized eggs that are ready to yield 
the adults and to hold them in subdued light for 2 to 
3 days. 
  
 
 
The emerging parasites readily parasitize the 
fresh eggs. The parasitoid - host ratio is adjusted 
accordingly to 1:6 get effective parasitism. 
 
The parasitized eggs in the Tricho Card turn 
back in 3 or 4 days and the adult parasitoids emerge 
in 8 to 10 days from the date of parasitization. 
The parasitized eggs in which the parasitoids in the 
larval or pupa l stage (i.e. before or after turning 
black) can be stored in the refrigerator (at 50C) for 
about 3 weeks without any loss in emergence. 
 
Precautions 
Poor quality of mass reared Trichogramma can 
result in control failures. The artificial conditions of 
mass rearing can select for genetic changes that 
reduce the effectiveness of the Trichogramma in the 
field. Such rearing conditions include rearing 
multiple generations on unnatural host eggs, the 
absence of plants, crowding and interference, rapid 
generation time, and failure to rejuvenate genetic 
stock. Except for obvious problems such as lack of 
adult emergence or wing deformities, growers and 
pest consultants cannot detect poor quality 
Trichogramma prior to release. Commercial 
suppliers are responsible for maintaining desirable 
characteristics necessary for good performance in 
the field. Production colonies should be periodically 
replaced with individuals from a stock culture 
maintained on the natural or target host. Suppliers 
also should assess the per cent  host egg 
parasitization, adult emergence, and the sex ratio of 
emerged adults to be sure they are within 
acceptable standards. Standards for established 
cultures on Corcyra are 95±5 per cent egg 
parasitization, 90±5 per cent adult emergence, and a 
sex ratio of 1 to 1.5 females per male. 
Field release: The parasitoids are released in the 
pharate stage or when few adults begin to emerge 
from the host egg during the evening hours. The 
cards are cut into bits neatly along the grids with 
least damage to the egg s and stapled beneath the 
foliage in the upper canopy level. To maximize the 
field parasitization it is recommended to release the 
parasitoids is as many locations as possible. 
Recently scientists are beginning to advocate the 
release of cards @ 1/5m row length. 
Maintenance of history sheet 
Accurate information is needed on the history of 
individual basins.  
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
102 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
The following information is furnished. 
1. Date of egg infestation 
2. Date of preparation of feed 
3. Source of egg 
4. Expected date of adult emergence 
5. Daily collection of moths 
6. Problems encountered with the basin during 
production 
 
Production of Host: 
Corcyra cephalonica commonly called as rice meal 
moth or rice moth is a pest of stored foods, 
viz.,cereals, cereal products, oilseeds, pulses, dried 
fruits, nuts and spices. Many of the natural enemies 
mass-bred in the laboratory for use in field against 
crop pests are dependent on either egg or larval 
stages of Corcyra due to the simple reason that it is 
easier and cheaper to produce natural enemies on 
different stages  of Corcyra than on their original 
hosts. 
 
Procedure 
1. Preparation of rearing basins 
The basins used for Corcyra multiplication are 
thoroughly cleaned and sterilized with 
formaldehyde. Whenever the trays are emptied after 
a cycle of rearing, they have to be cleaned 
preferably to 2 per cent formaldehyde and returned 
to storage until further use. On reuse the cleaning 
steps are repeated. 
2. Preparation of Jowar medium for Corcyra: 
a. The required quantities of jo war grains are 
coarsely milled and broken into  2-3 pieces in a 
milling machine. The broken grains are heat 
sterilized at 100 oC for 1 hour to eliminate the 
residual population of stored product insects viz., 
Rhyzopertha dominica , Sitotroga cerealella , 
Tribolium castaneum and fungal contaminants. 
Upon sterilization the grains are cooled under fan in 
a clean area. The grains are then transferred to 
basins @ 2.5 kg/basin. 
b. Groundnut kernel in required quantity is broken 
using a pounding machine or a mechanical blender 
(domestic mixer). Then 100 g of the broken kernel 
is transferred to each basin and the contents are 
hand mixed thoroughly. 
c.  Dry yeast (Bakers) and wettable sulfur is 
added @ 5g/ basin and the contents are mixed 
thoroughly. A spray of 10 ml of 0.01 -0.05% 
streptomycin sulfate and mixing of the contents 
follows this. This medium is used for rearing 
Corcyra larvae. 
d.  The number of basins required for egg 
infestation is calculated and the medium is prepared 
accordingly. 
3. Preparation of Corcyra eggs:  
The primary source of Corcyra eggs is re puted 
laboratories, commercial producers for bulk 
preparation. If it is intended to begin the production 
with nucleus colony, the adult moths can be 
collected from warehouses where the food materials 
are stored. 
a.   The eggs used for building up the colon y of 
Corcyra have to be free from contaminants like the 
moth scales and broken limbs and not exposed to 
UV light. 
b.   The collections of overnight laid eggs are 
measured volumetrically to ascertain the number of 
trays that can be infested with eggs. A cc of eggs is 
known to contain approximately 16000 – 18000 
eggs. 
4. Infestation of medium with eggs 
The overall production scheme involves initial 
infestation of the medium with Corcyra eggs in 
desired quantities. This is accomplished by 
sprinkling the freely flowing eggs on the surface of 
the medium in individual basins. Per basin 0.5 cc 
eggs of Corcyra is infested. The basins are carefully 
transferred to the racks.  
5. Handling the trays during larval development 
The larvae that hatch out in 3 -4 days begin t o feed 
the fortified joar medium. At this stage, light 
webbings are noticed on the surface. As the larvae 
grow up they move down. During this period the 
larvae are allowed to grow undisturbed in the trays. 
Handling of adults: The adults begin to emerge 
in 28-30 days after infestation of the eggs. The 
adults can be seen on the inside the cage. They are 
either aspirated with mechanical moth collector or 
collected with specimen tubes. The whole operation 
is carried out in a tent of mosquito net. This 
prevents the large-scale escape of the moths, which 
if uncontrolled can migrate to the storage area and 
spoil the grains stored by laying eggs. Workers 
involved in the collection of moths should wear 
face moths continuously to avoid inhalation of 
scales. The moths collected are transferred to the 
oviposition drum @ 1000 pairs per drum at a time. 
The oviposition drums of size 30 x 20 cm are made 
of plastic. The drums rest on tripod frames with 
legs of height 5cm. The bottoms of the drums are 
provided with wire meshes that enable collection of 
eggs. The walls of the drums have two vents 
(ventilation holes) opposed to each other. The vents 
are again covered with wire mesh. The lids of the 
drums have handles besides slots for introducing 
the moths and adult feed. The ovi position drums 
filled in a day are maintained for four to seven 
successive days for egg collection after which are 
emptied and cleaned for next cycle of use. 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
103 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
The adults are provided feed containing honey 
solution. The adult feed is prepared by mixing 50 
ml honey with 50 ml water. The feed is stored in 
refrigerator and used as and when required. Piece of 
cotton wool tied with a thread is soaked in the 
solution and inserted into the drum through the slot 
at the top. From a basin, moths can be collected 
upto 9 0 days after which the number of moths 
emerging dwindles down and keeping the basins is 
not economical for the producer. 
Handling of eggs : The moths lay the eggs in 
large numbers loosely. The scales and broken limbs 
are also found in larger quantities alon g with the 
eggs. They cause potential hazard to the workers 
after years of working in Corcyra laboratory. To 
minimize the risk of scales freely floating in the air, 
the oviposition drums are placed on sheets of filter 
paper in enamel trays which trap effec tively the 
scales. Sets of several oviposition drums are kept in 
ventilated place near an exhaust fan to enable the 
workers comfort. Daily morning the oviposition 
drums are lifted up and the wire -mesh bottoms are 
cleaned gently with a shoe brush so that th e eggs 
and remnants of scales and limbs settled on the 
mesh are collected along with those on the filter 
paper. The collections are cleaned by gently rolling 
the eggs on filter paper to another container. Then 
they are passed to sieves in series and finall y clean 
eggs are collected. The eggs are quantified in 
measuring cylinders and used for building up the 
stocks and natural enemy production. About 100 
pairs of adults produce 1.5 cc of eggs in 4 days 
laying period inside the oviposition drums. From 
each basin an average of 2500 moths are collected. 
Hence from each basin 18.00 – 20.00 cc of eggs can 
be obtained in 90 days. 
 
Reference 
Girault, A.A. (1915) Australian Hymenoptera 
Chalcidoidea I. Second supplement. Memoirs of 
the Queensland Museum. 3:142-153 
Viggiani, G. (1971). The significance of the male 
genitalia in the Trichogrammatidae (Hym., 
Chalcidoidea). Proceedings, XIII International 
Congress of Entomology, Moscow 1:313-314. 
Pinto, J.D. (2006). A review of the New World 
genera of Trichogrammatidae (Hymenoptera). 
Journal of Hymenoptera Research. 15(1):49-51. 
Tanwar, R.K., Bambawale, O.M. and Singh, 
Surender Kumar and Singh, Amerika (2006). A 
Handbook on Trichogramma: production and 
field release. National Centre for Integrated Pest 
Management, New Delhi–12. 
 
Mass production of Bracon hebetor 
 
Introduction:  
Bracon hebetor is a common gregarious ecto – 
larval parasitoid. There appears to be two strains of 
the parasitoid, one attacking field pests and the 
other stored product pests. 
Among the hosts recorded  are Corcyra 
cephalanica, Dichocracis punctiferalis,  Eublemma 
olivacea, Hellula undalis, Ostriniaicius kashmirica, 
Helicoverpa armigera and Opisina arenosella of 
which the O. arenosella is the important host.  
Parasitism is observed throughout the year, it  
ranged from 26.2 to 26.7% during the peak period 
of O. arenosella infestation. 
Kingdom: Animalia 
Class: Insecta 
Order: Hymenoptera 
Family: Braconidae  
S
N 
Specie
s 
Host Crop Distribution 
1.  Bracon 
hebetor 
Mostly 
larval 
parasitoids 
of 
lapidopter
a 
Field 
and 
orchar
d crop 
Cosmopolita
n  
 
Production procedure: 
B. hebetor  is reared on C. cephalonica at wide 
ranging temperature and fluctuating relative 
humidity.  
Pairs sorted out from freshly emerged brood are 
caged in specimen tubes (8 x 2.5 cm). Under 
laboratory conditions it is easy to rear.  
Fifth instar caterpillars of C. cephalonica of similar 
size are provided for oviposition and the parasitized 
larva removed daily from the tubes and maintained 
separately.  
The parasitoids are fed with 50% honey 
provided as ti ny droplets on wax -coated paper 
strips. 
B. hebetor  completes its total developmental 
period in 7 -12 days.  The egg, larval and pupal 
period are completed in 1 -2, 2 -4 and 3 -7 days 
respectively.  
The females start laying eggs 2 -5 days after 
emergence on partially paralyzed host caterpillars.  
The paralyzed larvae (not receiving the eggs) die 
within 3-5 days. Female parasitoids feed on host’s 
haemolymph. 
The eggs are laid singly or in groups of two to 
eight. A female is capable of laying 229 eggs (142 -
345) on 1 4-32 host caterpillars during its life span 
of 20 -63 days, the daily average being 2 -27, and 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
104 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
laid maximum number of eggs during the first ten 
days of oviposition period. 
A single host larva supports the development of 
11 eggs and 9 larvae of the parasitoid . The 
preoviposition period is 3 days, oviposition period 
22-55 days and post oviposition period 1-8 days.  
The fertile female lives for 20 -63 days. B. hebetor 
complete its developmental period on larvae of 
Corcyra cephalonica in 8.6 (7-10) days.  
Oviposition period lasts for 13 (5 -22) days. The 
mean fecundity is 72 (13 – 148). Females live for 
24-53 days.  Egg viability is 92% and adult 
emergence 81%. Male to female ratio is 5:1. 
 
Precautions: 
To avoid wastage, the surplus parasitoids could 
be stored in the  cocoon stage for one month in the 
refrigerator.  
The coccons are kept in a clear plastic jar (19x9 
cm) for emergence and provided with raisins as 
food.  
Segregate the mite ( Pediculoides ventricosus ) 
infested cultures of the host insect immediately. 
 
Mass production of Goniozus nephantidis 
 
Introduction 
Goniozus nephantidis  is the most widely used 
parasitoid of Opisina arenosella . It is a sturdy 
gregarious larval or prepupal ectoparasitoid.  
The female practices maternal care of eggs and 
larvae. The host la rvae are parasitized and the 
parasitoid even feeds on host body fluid.  
The parasitoid is also capable of suppressing the 
population by merely stinging and paralyzing 1st – 
2nd instar larvae.  G. nephantidis  is the most 
common and effective parasitoid of la te instars 
caterpillars of O. arenosella in several parts of the 
country.  
The parasitoid is being mass multiplied and 
released in Karnataka, Kerala and several other 
states. 
Kingdom: Animalia 
Class: Insecta 
Order: Hymenoptera 
Family: Bethylidae 
 
S
N 
Specie
s 
Host Crop Distributio
n 
1.  Goniozus 
nephantidis 
Larval 
ectoparasitoi
d of the 
coconut 
black-headed 
caterpillar, 
Opisina 
arenosella 
Field 
and 
orchar
d crop 
Andhra 
Pradesh; 
Karnataka; 
Kerala; 
Tamil 
Nadu etc. 
 
Production procedure: 
The parasitoid is multiplied  on Corcyra 
cephalonica larvae in diffused light.  A pair of 
parasitoid is introduced in tube (7.5 x 2.5 cm).  
The adults are provided honey in the form of small 
droplets on wax coated paper.  After a pre -
oviposition period of six days one healthy last instar 
larva is provided in a vial.  
The larvae parasitized and containing eggs of G. 
nephantidis are removed regularly from the vials till 
the death of the female.  Such larvae are kept in 
accordion type strips of paper in plastic boxes 
which are covered by muslin cloth. 
Considering the fecundity as 20 -50, the female 
is capable of parasitizing 6 -7 larvae in three 
oviposition spells each separated by 4-5 days.  
The life cycle of the parasitoid is completed in 
10-14 days (incubation 24-36 hrs, larval feeding 36-
48 hrs, prepupal stage 48 -60 hrs and cocoon period 
48 to 56 hrs + resting adult inside the cocoon 108 -
128 hrs). 
 
Mass production of Chelonus blackburni 
 
Introduction 
Chelonus blackburni is introduced from Hawaii. 
A parthenogenetic egg -larval parasitoid, C. 
blackburnii has a fairly wide host range but in India 
the common meal moth Corcyra cephalonica  and 
potato tuber moth Phthorimaea operculella  have 
often been used for multiplication of this parasitoid.  
Kingdom: Animalia 
Class: Insecta 
Order: Hymenoptera 
Family: Braconidae  
S
N  
specie
s 
Host Crop Distribution 
2.  Chelonus 
blackburni 
Mostly egg 
larval 
parasitoids 
of 
Lepidopter
a 
Field 
and 
orchar
d crop 
Cosmopolita
n  
Production procedure 
A set of 100, 0 -24 hr old eggs of Corcyra (not 
exposed to UV) are pasted to 5 x 5 cm card.  This 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
105 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
card containing eggs is exposed to 30 C. 
blackburnii adults in a 1.5 l container.  
The plastic container has windows with plastic 
mesh for aeration. Two cotton swabs, one soaked in 
10% honey solution and the other in drinking water 
are also placed inside from the side opening which 
is closed tightly with a cloth covered cotton plug.  
The egg card after exposing to C. blackburnii for 24 
hrs is removed and placed on 500 g sterilized Pearl 
millet medium. In 30 days time, adults start 
emerging from the cocoons formed in the Pearl 
millet medium after completing development on 
Corcyra larvae. The adults live for 25 days and their 
fecundity is about 400 eggs. 
 
Mass production of Trichoderma viridae 
 
Introduction  
Trichoderma viridae besides other species of the 
genus, is an omnipresent saprophytic fungus. Its 
colonization in rhizosphere of crop plants renders 
long time protection against diseases, improved 
growth of plants besides imparting resistance. Such 
species as T. harzianum, T. hamatum, T. l ignorum 
and their biotypes have the most biological and 
commercial importance. Trichoderma biofungicides 
are highly effective against the powdery mildew, 
the grey and the white rot, the mildew and other 
diseases. Active components of biopesticides made 
from this fungus are their spores, mycelium and 
metabolites. Trichoderma is able to suppress more 
than 60 species of pathogens (Pythium, Botritis, 
Phoma, Sclerotinia, Fusarium, Ascochyta, 
Alternaria, etc.) on different plants (cucumbers, 
tomatoes, cabbages, p eppers, various ornamentals, 
cereals and grain legume crops). 
Taxonomy, Identification and distribution  
Kingdom: Fungi 
Class: Sordariomycetes 
Order: Hypocreales 
Family: Hypocreaceae 
Genus: Trichoderma 
Species: viridae 
Trichoderma viridae is widely distributed in the 
world and found in substantial numbers in nearly all 
agricultural soils and in other environments such as 
decaying wood, etc. 
 
 
 
Trichoderma viridae colonies on dead wood and 
other organic matter 
 
Biology of biological control agents 
Trichoderma viridae form hyaline, branched and 
septate hyphae with profuse conidiophores and 
conidial formation. Conidiospores are ovoid to 
round spores, green in colour. 
 
 
  
Conidiophores and conidiospores under microscope 
Among their other activities, they gro w 
tropically toward hyphae of other fungi, coil about 
them in a lectin-mediated reaction, and degrade cell 
walls of the target fungi. This process 
(mycoparastitism) limits growth and activity of 
plant pathogenic fungi. Mycoparasites produce cell 
wall-degrading enzymes, which allow them to bore 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
106 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
holes into other fungi and extract nut rients for their 
own growth. In the process of development 
Trichoderma synthesizes a lot of antibiotics 
(gliotoxin, viridine, trichodermin, etc.).  
Mass production of biological control agent  
Production on PDA 
 
Materials required 
Potato     200 gm  
Carboxy Methyl Cellulose   5 gm/kg 
Distilled Water    1 litre 
Streptocyclin    03.5 gm  
Agar-Agar    20 gm 
D-glucose    20 gm 
 
Method 
1) Take 200gm healthy Potato, wash with distilled 
water, cut it into slice and keep in a beaker 
2) Add 400 ml distilled water and boil it for 45 min. 
till starch oozes out from potato slices 
3) Filter the content through fine muslin cloth and 
save the effluents 
4) Add 20 gm Agar -Agar, 20 gm D -glucose and 
heat it till Agar-Agar solubilizes 
5) Make the required volume 1 litre by adding 
distilled water 
6) Transfer the content in a conical flask  and close 
the mouth with cotton plug, wrap the mouth with 
Aluminium foil and tie with thread 
7) Autoclave it for 15 min at 15psi 
8) After completion of Autoclaving process, 
remove the conical flask and allow it to cool 
9) Add 0.5gm Streptocyclin per litre of media and 
mix it properly 
10) Transfer the media into test tube/Petri Dishes 
under Laminar Air Flow Chamber 
11) Wh en media get solidified, use sterile 
inoculation needle and under spirit lamp inside 
LAFC 
12) Take the Trichoderma culture from mother 
stocks with sterile inoculation needle and inoculate 
it into fresh PDA media 
13) Close the mouth and seal the petriplate  with 
Parafilm  
14) Keep 
the 
petriplate 
inside 
Incubator/at 
room 
temperature 
 
Trichoderma viridae colony on PDA 
Production on broken maize, sorghum or 
finger millets 
 
Material required  
Sorghum/ Maize broken grains, distilled water, 
hot air drier, autoclav able bags/ conical flasks, 
autoclave, D -Glucose/ Jaggery, Yeast extract, 
Cotton plugs, Streptocyclin, inoculation needle, 
muslin cloth, grinder, talcum Powder, carboxy 
methyl cellulose  
 
Procedure 
1) Take 100 gm broken maize/sorgum grain, wash 
with distill ed water properly and keep in hot air 
drier for 15 min. 
2) Transfer the grains from drier to autoclavable 
polybag/conical flask 
3) Add 100ml distilled water, 1gm D -
glucose/Jaggery and 0.5gm Yeast extract 
4) Mix the content by proper shaking and plug the 
mouth with cotton plug and tie with thread 
5) Autoclave the polybag/conical flask for 15 -20 
minute at 15psi 
6) After Autoclaving, remove the polybag/conical 
flask and allow the content to cool 
7) Add 0.01gm streptocyclin solution and shake  
8) Under LAFC, pe rform Inoculation of 
Trichoderma culture by using sterile inoculation 
needle 
9) Plug the mouth with cotton and tie with thread 
and keep the inoculated polybag/conical flask 
inside incubator/at room temp for 6-7 days. 
10) After full growth of mycelia, remov e the 
material in a plastic tray , spread with spreader and 
cover with thin  black muslin cloth and allow it to 
shade dry for 5-6 days 
11) After complete drying, grind the Trichoderma 
material to powder using grinder 
12) Prepare the 1000 Gm ready to use for mulation 
as below: 
Trichoderma material 100gm + Talcum Powder 
900gm + Carboxy methyl cellulose 5gm  
 
Application 
Suspend Trichoderma viride  material in 
sufficient water (500g/100L) to achieve uniform 
application. Apply at the rate of 100 -200 g per 
cubic metre (loose) of greenhouse potting mix, soil 
or planting beds. Trichoderma viride can be applied 
through low pressure watering nozzles such as fan 
nozzles or other watering systems (drip system) 
after filtering with filters. Agitate to maintain 
suspension. For best effect, treat potting mix several 
days before use for seeding or transplants.  
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
107 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
For bulbs & Ornamentals: Dip bulbs in 
Trichoderma viride  suspension (100 g/L) prior to 
planting. 
 
Dose 
Soil application: 5 kg /ha along with any organic 
fertilizer (wit hout pathogenic contaminants).  Seed 
treatment: @ 4-5 gm per kg of seeds as per standard 
wet treatment. Seedling treatment: @ 100 g/l prior 
to planting. 
It is necessary to  incorporate the  conidia of  
Trichoderma every 10 –15 days for the control of 
the mentioned phytopathogens. 
Two to three applications in vegetables 
ornamentals and 4 -5 applications in lawns and 
landscape crops are recommended. Applications 
during early stages of plant growth protect the plant 
during critical stages of development. 
 
Precaution 
There are some limitations for the application of 
Trichoderma biofungicides. At first they are 
preventive only because biofungicides are usually 
not able to control the diseases, which have already 
developed. The fungicides containing Trichoderma 
are effe ctive at temperatures more than 14°C (the 
optimal threshold of development is observed at 
24–28°C). Use of the conidial form of the fungicide 
makes the application independent on the 
conditions of relative air humidity. 
 
Reference 
Baby, U.I. 1998.  Biocontrol potential of fungicide 
resistant mutants of Trichoderma spp. Indian 
Journal of Microbiology 38(3): 165-166.  
Biswas, K.K. 1999. Screening of isolates of 
Trichoderma harzianum  Rifai for their relative 
biocontrol efficacy against Fusarium oxysporum 
f.sp. udum and Rhizoctonia solani Kuhn. Annals 
of Plant Protection Sciences 7 (2): 125-130.  
Bora, L.C., Minku, Das., Das, B.C. and Das, M. 
2000. Influence of microbial antagonists and soil 
amendments on bacterial wilt severity and yield 
of tomato ( Lycopersicon esculentum). Indian 
Journal of Agricultural Sciences 70 (6): 390 -
392.  
Chakrabarti, D.K., Kumar, R. and Prasad, J. 1998. 
Stem rot of Psoralea corylifolia  and its 
biological control. Indian Journal of Agricultural 
Sciences 68 (6) : 333-335. 
 
 
 
 
Mass production of Beauveria bassiana 
 
Introduction  
Beauveria bassiana  is a mitosporitic and  
aggressive entomopathogenic fungus, attacking a 
wide host range of insects at larval or adult stages. 
It was the first recorded entomopathogen in world 
(Bassi 1835). It attac ks all stages of insects of all 
groups. Some of the pests of economic importance , 
which can be targeted for control through B. 
Bassiana are Helicoverpa armigera , Spodoptera 
spp., Odontotermis spp, Chilo infuscatellus , 
Ideoscopus spp, Bemisia tabaci, etc. (Bambawale et 
al 2005).  
 
Taxonomy, Identification and distribution of 
common species 
Valid scientific name: Beauveria bassiana  
(Balsamo) Vuillemin 
Kingdom:  Fungi 
Class:  Sordariomycetes 
Order:  Hypocreales 
Family:  Clavicipitaceae 
Genus:  Beauveria 
Species:  bassiana 
 
B. Bassiana  occurs world wide and has one of 
the largest host lists among imperfect fungi. It 
occurs as a ubiquitous saprophyte in soil 
(Bambawale et al 2005). The pathogen is of 
cosmopolitan nature. The hosts include mainly 
Lepidoptera, Col eoptera, Hemiptera, Diptera and 
Hymenoptera.  
 
Biology of Beauveria bassiana 
 
Beauveria bassiana  is an anamorphic fungus 
with septate hyaline mycelium. Colonies appear 
white in cultures or tufts of white mycelium bearing 
masses of powdery spores. Conidioph ores bear 
conidia in acropetal succession. The conidiospores 
are tiny, measuring only a few microns. A spore is 
produced at the tip of the mother cell and the 
growth of the mother cell ceases. A new growing 
point initiates just below this terminal spore, g rows 
past it and a second spore is produced at a higher 
level. This uses up the new growing point and a 
third growing point is then initiated just below the 
second spore. Every time a spore is produced the 
hyphal tip is used up and a new growing point is 
produced. In this way a succession of spores is 
produced with the youngest spore at the tip (= i.e 
acropetal succession) and the spore head gets longer 
and longer. When all the spores are dislodged the 
spore-bearing tip of the conidiogenous cell has a zig 
zag appearance and is referred to as a rachis ( this 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
108 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
term is also used for the seed head in wheat when 
all the seeds are 
gone).
  
 
Microphotograph of Beauveria bassiana  
conidiophores  
Beauveria bassiana  in action as 
entomopathogen The action of B. bassiana  on 
insects begins from the penetration of spores in a 
body cavity through dermal coat (cuticle). High 
humidity or free water is essential for conidial 
germination and infection establishes between 24 
and 48 hours. Having penetrated in a body the 
spores ger minate in hyphae, then a mycelium 
overgrows from which conidia split off. Having 
proved in the body the conidia begin to circulate in 
hemolymph. Mycelium gradually fills up the whole 
body of the insect. In the beginning muscular tissue 
is affected. Fungus growth continues until all the 
tissues are destroyed. The infected insect may live 
for three to five days after hyphal penetration and, 
after death, the conidiophores bearing conidia are 
produced. The fungus can form conidiophores, 
which rupture the cuticle and the envelope of a dead 
larva. The affected insect is covered with white, 
wadded coating (conidiophores). Then it is 
observed spore maturation, and mass sporulation 
begins. The spores are tiny, measuring only a few 
microns. Colonies appear as tufts of  white 
mycelium bearing masses of powdery spores burst 
out through the body parts of infected insects. 
 
 
Beauveria bassiana attacking insects 
 
The effectiveness of Beauveria bassiana depends 
very much on climatic conditions, th e methods of 
application and doses. The best hydrothermal 
conditions for the development of B. bassiana are: a 
temperature of 25 –28°C, a relative air humidity of 
80–90%. 
 
Mass Production of Beauveria bassiana 
 
Material required  
Base material, e.g. parboil ed rice, autoclavable 
bags of appropriate size, cotton plugs, thread, 
pressure cooker, stove/ hot plate, 5% Sodium 
hypochlorite solution, UV Lamp, Syringe for 
inoculation, Streptocyclin. 
 
Procedure 
Soak parboiled rice in water for 30 min 
Drain & fill in po lythene bags @ 1 kg equally 
distributed in 5 bags (200 g/ bag) 
Close mouth of bag with cotton plug & tie with 
thread 
Place about 15 bags (3 kg material) in the 
pressure cooker and cook with some quantity of 
water. After 3 whistles reduce the flame and allo w 
heating for 15 min.  
Clean working table with 5% sodium 
hypochlorite solution & switch on the UV lamp. 
Take out the bags & remove water adhering to 
the sides with tissue paper and place in a clean tray. 
Switch off UV lamp. Place the bags on working 
table and allow further cooling 
Sterilize the syringe along with the rice bags 

CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
109 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
Holding the liquid mother culture bottle above 
the flame, remove plug and add 2 drops of 
surfactant and 10 drops of antibiotic & shake well 
Draw 15 ml liquid culture in the sterilize d 
syringe and inject into the bag through cotton plug 
[Care to avoid puncturing of bag] 
Mix well, spread rice grain within bag and place 
in racks for incubation 
After 2 weeks incubation, on profuse 
sporulation, gently crush the lumps into individual 
grains 
Cut open bags from sides, spread the culture 
within the bag and allow drying for 4-5 days 
After complete drying, separate the spores by 
sieving 
Allow drying on the work bench for about 3 
days. A good culture with 1 kg rice yields about 40 
g dry conidia in  two or 3 sievings at weekly 
intervals. Sieving should be done under hood to 
avoid inhalation of spores. 
Pack the dried spores in laminated aluminium 
foil and store in freezer compartment of a 
refrigerator. 
 
Precaution 
The fungus has been kwon to cause inf ection of 
nasal passage in human, therefore caution is 
necessary (Amerika Singh et al 2005). 
 
Maintenance of quality 
Formulations should contain conidia of 
Beauveria bassiana at a concentration of 2.3 x 107 
spores per ml or at least 5 x 108 spores per gram . 
Viability of the spores is determined by culture on 
nutrient agar and counting the colonies formed. 
Efficacy is checked by bioassay with an appropriate 
insect. 
 
Field release 
Beauveria bassiana  is released as foliar sprays 
against borers, whitefly, thrip s, aphids, mealybugs 
and a range of soft -bodied coleopteran, homopteran 
and heteropteran pests. Application rates depend 
upon the crop and the pests to be controlled. 
 
Dose 
The normal application rate on commodity  crops is 
750 to 1000 ml of product per hec tare, for 
ornamentals under cover or outdoors 24 to 80 ml 
per 10 litres and on turf and lawns 32 to 96 ml per 
100 square metres. 
Reference 
Bassi A. (1835). Del mal del segno calcinaccio 
moscardino malattia che affeigge bachi de seta. 
1. Teorica. Orcesi, Lodi. 
Bambawale, O.M., Sangale, U.R., Nasim Ahmad & 
Meena, B.L. 2005. Potential of Fungal and 
Bacterial Pathogens in the Management of Key 
Lepidopteran Pests. In: Integrated Pest 
Management- Principles and Applications 
Volume 1: Principles, Eds Amerika Singh , OP 
Sharma & DK Garg. Pp 100-119. 
Bhadauria, Bhanu Pratap, Smita Puri & PK Singh 
(2012). Mass Production of Entomopathogenic 
Fungi using Agricultural products. The Bioscan 
7(2): 229-232. 
Latifian M., Bahar Rad, Majid Amani and Esmaeil 
Rahkhodaei (2013). M ass production of 
entomopathogenic fungi Beauveria bassiana 
(Balsamo) by using agricultural products based 
on liquid -solid diphasic method for date palm 
pest control. International Journal of Agriculture 
and Crop Sciences 5(19): 2337-2341. 
 
Production of the nuclear polyhedrosis virus 
of Helicoverpa armigera 
 
Introduction  
In India, Helicoverpa armigera  is of major 
importance damaging a wide variety of food, fibre, 
oilseed, fodder and horticultural crops. The nuclear 
polyhedrosis virus of H. armigera  (HaNPV) is 
currently used for the management of H. armigera 
on chickpea, cotton, pigeon pea, tomato and 
sunflower. Mass production of Nuclear 
Polyhedrosis Virus (NPV) on commercial scale is 
restricted to in vivo procedures in host larvae which 
are obtained by 
 Field collection from cotton, pigeon pea and 
chickpea – H. armigera 
 Mass culturing in the laboratory in semisynthetic 
diet – H. armiger 
 Some small scale producers use field – collected 
larvae for mass production of NPV in spite of 
the following constraints. 
 Collection of a large number of larvae in 
optimum stage (late IV / early V instars) is time-
consuming and can be expensive in terms of 
labour and transportation costs. 
 Wild populations of insects may carry disease 
causing organisms like 
microsporidians,cytoplasmic polyhedrosis virus, 
stunt virus and fungal pathogens which will 
affect both virus production and quality. 
 Introduction of wild strains of NPV resulting in 
quality control problems. 
 Transportation of a large number of larvae with 
cannibalistic behaviour will be a difficult task. 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
110 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
 Parasitized larvae collected from the field will 
die prematurely yielding little virus. 
Rearing of larvae in the natural host plant will 
involve frequent change of food at least once a day 
during the incubation period of 5 -9 days increasing 
the handling time and hence the cost.  In order to 
reduce the cost, field collected larvae are released 
into semi synthetic diet treated with virus inoculum. 
Mass culturing of insects in semi synthetic diet 
involves high level of expertise,  hygiene and 
cleanliness. 
Composition of semi-synthetic diet for H. armigera 
 
Component     Quantity 
Chickpea flour    100g 
Yeast     30g 
Wesson’s salt mix   07g 
Methyl Paraben    02g 
Sorbic acid    01g 
Ascorbic acid    03g 
Agar     13g 
Vanderzint vit. Solution    08ml 
Streptomycin sulphate   40mg 
Carbendazim    675mg 
Formalin    02ml 
Water     720ml 
 
Procedure for larval diet 
1. Boil agar in 360ml of water, until completely 
dissolved. 
2. Cook chickpeas in 360ml of water for 10 
minutes and then transfer to a mixer. 
3. Add the agar to the chickpea flour and mix 
4. The Wesson’s salt mix, methyl paraben, sorbic 
acid and yeast are added together and 
homogenised for 5 minutes. 
5. After the died has cooled to about 70 oC, add the 
vitamin mix, ascorbic acid, carbendazim, 
formalin and streptomycin sulphate, and mix the 
died well for 5 minutes. 
6. While still warm, dispense the diet into the 
rearing vessels, place (preferably) in laminar 
flow hood and leave to cool and solidify. 
7. Cover the diet with clingfilm and store in a 
refrigerator until use. 
Production procedure 
The NPV of  H. armigera is propagated in early 
fifth instar larvae.  The virus is multiplied in a 
facility away from the host culture laboratory.  The 
dose of the inoculum used is 5 x 10 5 polyhedral 
occlusion bodies (POB) in 1 0 ml suspension.  The 
virus is applied on to the semisynthetic diet (lacking 
formaldehyde) dispensed previously in 5 ml glass 
vials. A blunt end polished glass rod (6 mm) is used 
to distribute the suspension containing the virus 
uniformly over the diet surf ace. Early fifth instar 
stage of larvae are released singly into the glass 
vials after inoculation and plugged with cotton and 
incubated at a constant temperature of 25 oC in a 
laboratory incubator. When the larvae exhausted the 
feed, fresh untreated diet is provided. The larvae are 
observed for the 
development of 
virosis and the 
cadavers collected 
carefully from 
individual bottles 
starting from fifth 
day. Approximately, 
200 cadavers are 
collected per sterile 
cheese cup (300 ml) 
and the contents are 
frozen i mmediately. 
Depending upon 
need, cadavers are 
removed from the 
refrigerator and 
thawed very rapidly 
by agitation in 
water. 
 
Processing of NPV 
The method of 
processing of NPV 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
111 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
requires greater care to avoid losses during 
processing. The pellet finally collected is suspended 
in distilled water and made up to a known volume, 
which is necessary to calculate the strength of the 
POB in the purified suspension. 
 
 
Mass production of Cryptolaemus 
montrouzieri Mulsant 
 
Introduction: 
Cryptolaemus montrouzieri  Mulsant w as 
introduced into India in 1898 by Newport from 
Australia mainly for the control of C. viridis , but 
has established on many species of mealybugs and 
scales. It has been successfully used for the control 
of guava mealybugs, F. virgata, guava green shield 
scale, Chloropulvinaria psidii (Maskell), grapevine 
mealybug, M. hirsutus , coffee mealybug, 
Planoeoeeus citri (Risso), etc.  
 
Taxonomy, Identification and distribution of 
common species 
Kingdom: Animalia 
Class: Insecta 
Order: Coleoptera 
Family: Coccinellidae 
SN specie
s 
Host Crop Distributi
on 
1. 
Cryptolaemus montrouzieri  
Mulsant 
Mealy 
bugs, 
soft 
scales 
and 
some 
other 
soft 
bodied 
sucking 
pests 
Citrus, 
coffee, 
grapes, 
mango, 
several 
other fruit 
crops, 
ornamental
s and 
cotton 
Widely 
distributed 
in India. 
 
Biology of Cryptolaemus montrouzieri 
Mulsant 
 
In the laboratory, the life cycle is completed in 
approximately 30 days.  The premating and 
preoviposition periods are about 5 and 10 days 
respectively. The oviposition is about 10 days. Eggs 
are laid from late eveni ng to early morning.  They 
are pale yellowish white, the surface being smooth 
and shiny.  It is oval to cylindrical, both the ends 
beings smoothly rounded. Incubation period ranges 
from 5 to 6 days but extended in winter months.  
Viability of eggs is 90 to 100 per cent. 
The newly hatched grub is sluggish but becomes 
active after 3 to 4 hours.  The tiny grub is pale 
greyish with white lines across the body along intra 
segmental regions.  These white lines become 
prominent after few hours and white wax strands 
develop after a day. The grub has four larval instars, 
and the larval stage occupies about 20 days.  They 
feed on all stages of mealy bugs.  Duration of first, 
second, third and fourth instar grubs are 3-4, 4, 4-5-
7-8 days respectively.  Grownup grubs are entire ly 
covered with white wax strands.  When the grub is 
disturbed, it exudes a yellow fluid from the dorsal 
surface of the body for defensive purpose.  The 
prepupal period is 2 to 4 days when it suspends 
feeding activities.  
The pupal period varies from 7 to 9 days. 
The adult spends about one day in the pupal case 
before it emerges. It is covered with a white powder 
like substance for a day.  The male could be 
distinguished from the female by the colouration of 
first pair of legs. The first pair of legs in the ca se of 
male is brown and the latter two pairs being black, 
whereas in the female all the three pairs are black.  
Male to female ratio is 1 : 1.  Adults are also known 
to attack and feed the mealy bugs.  Longevity of 
adults ranges from 50 to 60 days and the fec undity 
is about 200-220 eggs. 
 
Mass production of Cryptolaemus 
montrouzieri Mulsant: 
 
Material required: 
Large sized cages, stainless steel stands, red 
pumpkins infested with mealy bugs, wax, 
carbendazim, burlap, camel hair brush, etc.  
 
Procedure: 
After 1 5 days of infestation of pumpkins with 
bugs they are exposed to a set of 100 beetles for 24 
hrs. After exposing, the pumpkin is kept back in a 
cage as described for under production of  M. 
hirsutus. The beetle during the period of exposure 
feed on mealy bug s as well as deposits their eggs 
singly or in groups of 4-12. The grubs are visible in 
such cages within a week of exposure to beetles.  
The young grubs feed on eggs and small mealy 
bugs but as they grow they become voracious and 
feed on all stages of mealy bugs. For facilitating the 
pupation of grubs dried guava leaves or pieces of 
papers are kept at the base of each of the cages. The 
first beetle from the cages starts emerging on 30th 
day of exposure to  C. montrouzieri  adults. The 
beetles are collected dai ly and kept in separate 
cages for about 10 -15 days to facilitate completion 
of mating and pre -oviposition. The beetles are also 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
112 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
fed on diet containing agar powder (1 g), sugar (20 
g), honey (40 cc) and water (100 cc).  The adult diet 
is prepared by boiling sugar in 70 cc of water, 
adding 1 g agar, diluting 40 cc honey in 30 cc of 
water and adding to the sugar and agar mixture 
when it comes to boiling point.  The hot liquid diet 
is kept on small white plastic cards in the form of 
droplets which get solidified on cooling. Such cards 
containing adult diet can be fed not only to  C. 
montrouzieri but also to many other species of 
coccinellids. From each cage about 175 beetles are 
obtained.  
The emergence of the beetles is completed 
within 10days.  Beetles can also be  reared 
on Corcyra cephalonica eggs but empty ovisacs 
of Planococcus citri are to be kept for inducing egg 
laying by the beetles.  Cryptolaemus is most active 
when the weather is sunny. A temperature of 22 to 
25°C and a relative humidity of 70 to 80 % are 
optimal for egg laying. The beetle is not active 
when temperature drops to 16°C (diapause). 
Temperatures above 33°C confuse the beetles when 
looking for prey. 
 
Precaution: 
All due precautions should be taken to avoid 
scarcity of food for the grubs to avoid cannibalism 
by grubs. All the pumpkins showing signs of rotting 
should be properly incinerated. 
 
Maintenance of quality: 
Sufficient food should be provided to the 
predators. A temperature of 22 to 25°C and a 
relative humidity of 70 to 80 % are optimal and 
should be maintained.  Absence of live product 
contaminants, maintenance of purity and viability 
of C. montrouzieri are of great importance in order 
to maintain the quality. Breeding with field 
collected wild population after every third 
generation is advis able. Sex ratio of 1:1 to be 
maintained during release. 
 
Transport: 
Cryptolaemus montrouzieri is supplied as adults 
packed per 25 or 500 pieces in plastic tubes with 
filter paper as carrier. If necessary, they can be 
stored for a short while at a temperature of 10-15°C 
and RH >85% 
 
Field release: 
Before releasing in the field in the endemic 
areas, moderate to severely infested plants are 
marked. The plant trunks are ringed one foot away 
with a band of 5% diazinon granules 24 hrs before 
the release of the beetles; this stops the patrolling of 
ants on the trunk at least for 3 days. 
 
Dose: 
The general release rate recommended is 10 
beetles or 50 grubs per infested plant and can be 
varied depending on the crop and the extent of 
infestation. 
For the suppression o f Rastrococcus iceryoides 
Green and other coccids including Nipaecoccus 
viridis infesting mango 20 -25 adults of C. 
montrouzieri are released on each of the infested 
mango tree. 
When applying Cryptolaemus in greenhouses, 
introduce 2 to 3 adults/m². 
 
Maintenance of history sheet: 
The following information is furnished. 
1. No. of adults released per cage. 
2. Date of release. 
3. Different developmental periods. 
4. Expected date of adult emergence. 
5. Collection of adults. 
6. Problems encountered with the culture 
during production. 
 
 
 
Biology of Host (Maconellicoccus hirsutus): 
The grapevine mealy bugs occur throughout the 
year on grapevine.  The bugs are found the leaves, 
shoots, nodes, bunch and loose bark in the vine.  
The adult females are pinkish and covered with a 
mealy coat . The fecundity per adult is 350 -500 
eggs. The orange coloured eggs hatch in 5 -10 days 
and the crawlers migrate and settle on places that 
support their food requirement.  The crawlers 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
113 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
become sedentary as they advance in age.  The 
multiplication rate of the b ugs is higher in summer 
months and life cycle gets prolonged during cooler 
months. 
 
Host production:  
Material required: 
Large sized cages, stainless steel stands, red 
pumpkins, wax, carbendazim, burlap, camel hair 
brush, etc. 
 
Procedure:  
Colony establishment 
The colonies of the mealy bugs are established 
from field collection initially. Guava plantations, 
vineyards, croton plants, citrus and pomegranate 
gardens are good reservoirs of the mealy bug 
populations. From them a primary colony under 
quarantine i s established separately in the lab 
utilizing the quarantine facility. During this period 
the colony is purified to obtain mealy bug 
population free of attacks by parasitoids and 
scavenging ants. 
Culture maintenance 
The mealy bugs are cultured on pumpkin ( red) 
in the laboratory. It is very difficult to maintain the 
colony on the natural host plants. The selection of 
pumpkin is critical for successful development of 
mealy bugs. Fleshy pumpkins with intact peduncle 
and deep ridges and furrows of weight 2.5 kg  
devoid of wounds and mouldy patches are used for 
multiplication of the bugs. The pumpkins are 
soaked in carbendazim 0.5% for 1 min. and shade 
dried. The cut ends and wounds are plugged with 
molten wax. Along the furrows burlap is provided 
to facilitate se ttling of the crawlers. The pumpkins 
are placed in large sized cages over stainless steel 
stands. The cages are set up in ant proof conditions 
as the mealy bugs secrete honey dews which attract 
ants invariably.  
Ovisacs of healthy adults are collected and 
placed on fresh pumpkin in the laboratory 
individually. From them, the eggs are allowed to 
hatch and multiply. The crawlers move along the 
burlap and settle. In a month time, the mealy bugs 
begin to smother the entire surface of the pumpkin. 
From this stoc k, subsequent colonies are 
established. When the colony is in active growth 
period with breeding females, the ovisacs are 
collected with the help of camel hair brush and 
transferred to fresh pumpkins prepared as above.  
 
Precaution: 
During the mass product ion care is taken to 
avoid fungal invasion. The cages, steel ware and 
burlap used are sterilized using common bleach. 
Used pumpkin fruits with symptoms of mould 
invasion are disposed of immediately.  The cages 
are to be set up in ant proof conditions. The c ulture 
should be free from parasitoid infestation. 
 
Maintenance of quality: 
Culture should be a pure one, free from live 
product contaminants, parasitoids, diseases, etc. 
 
Maintenance of history sheet: 
The following information is furnished. 
1. Date of infestation with mealybug. 
2. Scientific name of the species. 
3. Source of mealy bug. 
4. Different developmental periods. 
5. Problems encountered with the culture 
during production. 
 
 
 
Reference: 
Leppla, N.C, Bloem, K. A. and Luck, R.F.2002. 
Quality control for mass -reared arthropods. 
Proceedings of the Eighth and Ninth Workshops 
of the IOBC Working Group on Quality Control 
of Mass-Reared Arthropods.pp 171. 
National repository of natural enemies of crop pests 
and weeds. Final technical report (01-04-1997 to 
31-03-2000). Project Directorate of Biological 
Control (Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research) Hebbal, Bellary road, Bangalore - 560 
024. 
Sahayaraj,K. 2004. Indian insect predators in 
biological control. Daya pullishing house. 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
114 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
1123/74. Devaram Park, Tri Nagar, Delhi -
110035. 
Salih, M, Atlihan,R. and Karaca,I.2006.  The life 
table of Cryptolaemus montrouzieri  Mulsant 
(Coleoptera: Coccinellidae) after different 
storage periods. Journal of Food, Agriculture & 
Environment. 4 (1): 282-287. 
Singh, S.P.1995. Technology for Produc tion of 
Natural Enemies. Project Directorate of 
Biological Control., Post Bag No. 2491. H.A. 
Farm Post, Bangalore-560024 (India). 
http://www.biobest.be 
http://www.nbaii.res.in 
http://www.tnau.ac.in/ 
 
Mass production of Chilocorus nigrita 
(Fabricious) 
 
Introduction: 
Chilocorus nigrita  (Fabricius) is a voracious 
predator of many immobile or slow -moving 
Homoptera, especially diaspine scales like 
sugarcane scale, Melanaspis glomerata (Green), 
California red scale, Aonidiella aurantii (Maskell), 
Green shield sca le, Chloropulvinaria psidii, 
coconut scale Aspidiotus destructor  and 
coffee green scale, Coccus viridis (Green) and also 
aphids, aleyrodids, psyllids, pseudococcids, 
margarodids, coccids, etc. (Samways, 1984). This 
predator is encountered naturally in seve ral 
ecosystems where diaspine scales are abundant. It is 
native to the Indian subcontinent and has been 
introduced into USA for the biological control of 
Aonidiella aurantii  (Maskell) on citrus, into 
Mauritius and Hawaii for Aspidiotus destructor 
Signoret on coconut and for other scale insects in 
several other countries.  
 
Taxonomy, Identification and distribution of 
common species 
Kingdom: Animalia 
Class: Insecta 
Order: Coleoptera 
Family: Coccinellidae 
SN species Host Crop Distribution 
1.  Chilocoru
s nigrita  
(Fabricio
us) 
 Scale 
insects, 
aphids, 
etc. Sugar 
cane, 
citrus, 
mango, 
brinjal, 
coconut,a
reca nut, 
coffee, 
black 
pepper, 
etc. 
Widely 
distribute
d in India 
2.  C. 
subindicu
s Booth 
Diaspine 
scales 
Coconut, 
areca nut, 
coffee, 
black 
pepper, 
etc. 
southern 
India, 
Lakshadw
eep 
Islands, 
etc. 
3.  C. 
circumdat
us 
Schonherr 
Diaspine 
scales 
Coconut, 
areca nut, 
coffee, 
black 
pepper, 
etc. 
 
 
southern 
India 
 
Biology of Chilocorus nigrita (Fabricious): 
Length 3.2 -4.0 mm; width 2.9 -3.9 mm. Form 
subrounded, almost hemispherical and strongly 
convex. Head dull orange yellow. Pronotum dark 
pitchy brown to black in middle, paler on sides, 
anterolateral flaps orange yellow. Elytra black, 
shiny, with fine punctations. Ventral side including 
legs and inner margins of elytral epipleura orang e 
yellow to yellowish brown, outer margins of 
epipleura pitchy brown to black. Male genitalia and 
female spermatheca as illustrated. Larva greyish, 
oval in outline with numerous spiny, branched 
protuberances on dorsal side. 
Studies on biology of Chilocorus nigrita (Fab.) 
revealed that total developmental period of C. 
nigrita was shortest (26.13 days) on Melanaspis 
glomerata (Green) when compared with Aspidiotus 
destructor (Sign.) and Hemiberlesia lataniae  
(Signoret). The fecundity and longevity of C. 
nigrita were found to be comparatively high with 
maximum suitability index (2.638) when reared on 
M. glomerata . Adults of C. nigrita  was voracious 
than grub stage and each adult required 1195.65 ± 
23.01, 1183.33 ± 52.04, 1095 ± 67.27 number of M. 
glomerata, A. d estructor and H. lataniae  while a 
total of 244.41 ± 4.89, 228.73 ± 6.52 and 219.73 ± 
3.26 number of scale insects were consumed by 
grub in its all four stages, respectively. Old grubs 
consumed more scales than the young grubs. 
 
Mass production of Chilocorus nigrita: 
 
Material required: 
Cages, Honey-agar diet, plastic plates, cotton pads, 
sugarcane setts inoculated with scale insects, etc.  
 
Procedure: 
The predator can be multiplied on several diaspine 
scales (Aonidiella aurantii (Maskell), Hemiberlesia 
lataniae (Signoret) and others. But is easily 
multiplied on M. glomerata. 
C. nigrita  adults are released @ 100 per unit 
(cage or tray). Honey -agar is provided as 
supplementary food for adults. 
Honey-agar is prepared by adding 1000 cc 
water, 10 gm agar agar pow der, 200 gms sugar and 
400 gms honey. The sugar is first added to 750 cc 
of water, once the sugar dissolves, add agar agar. 
The honey is mixed with 250 cc of water, when 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
115 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
sugar agar solution starts boiling honey solution is 
added and the mixture boiled for about half a 
minute. The hot adult diet is removed from the fire 
and small drops arranged on plastic plates or hard 
board or thick cards. On solidifying the diet is 
offered to the beetles. 
The first beetles start emerging from the 
multiplication cage in ab out 30 days time and the 
beetles continue to emerge for about a week. The 
adults are collected daily and the days collection 
kept in separate cages, 100 beetles each (A) where 
breeding of progenies has to continue, and 1000 
beetles (B) each from where eggs  are obtained for 
field release. The beetles start egg laying within 5 
to 11 days. For field release (B) the eggs are 
obtained on cotton wool cut into squares, about 4 
cm x 4 cm and laid over the feeding sites. The 
females readily oviposit on such pads. 
Thirty five 4 cm x 4 cm pads of the cotton are 
placed in each egg obtaining adult beetle cage (B) 
containing 1000 adults each and the pads with eggs 
removed every day. Each pad contains about 40 
eggs (usually more). 
This beetle can also be cultured on Latani a 
Scale, Hemiberlesia lataniae  (Signoret) on 
pumpkins. 
 
Precaution: 
Only 24 hr old eggs should be dispatched, so 
that by the time the shipment reaches the 
destination the eggs tend to hatch thus precluding 
egg parasitism in the field. 
The procedure adopted  for producing C. nigrita 
could also be used for producing Pharoscymnus 
horni Weise, Sticholotis madagassa and Rhizobius 
(Lindorus) lopthanthae (Blaisdell) and other similar 
beetles feeding on diaspine scale insects. Many 
diaspine scales can also be multiplied on pumpkins. 
The larvae of certain coccinellid beetles particularly 
of R. lophanthae tend to develop cannibalism in the 
absence of suitable stage and sufficient number of 
the hosts (these conditions normally do not develop 
in commercial production uni ts where the 
production assembly is geared to give a definite 
turn out to meet the demand of the farmers). 
Maintenance of quality: 
Sufficient food should be provided to the 
predators. Absence of live product contaminants, 
maintenance of purity and viabilit y of the species 
are of great importance in order to maintain the 
quality. Breeding with field collected wild 
population after every third generation is advisable. 
Strict maintenance of hygienic condition. 
 
Transport: 
The egg containing pads in hard card b oard 
boxes or adults packed in plastic tubes with filter 
paper as carrier are readily transported to the 
release site. 
 
Field release: 
The pads are placed or distributed throughout 
the sugarcane field by locating the heavily infested 
focal points within th e field. The hatching grubs 
start feeding on the scale insects present in the 
vicinity and generation of the beetle develops in the 
sugarcane field. The beetles of the second 
generation which have developed in the sugarcane 
field disperse to feed on the po pulation of the scale 
insect in the area. 
 
Dose: 
In endemic areas 100 spots per hectare are 
selected and at each spot 10 pads containing eggs 
are placed over the scale infested canes. In areas 
where adult beetle release is preferred, release 1500 
beetles o f C. nigrita and /or  Pharoscymnus horni 
Weise per hectare at the first appearance of the pest. 
In Citrus: Ten adults / tree. 
 
Maintenance of history sheet: 
The following information is furnished. 
1. No. of adults released per cage. 
2. Date of release. 
3. Different developmental periods. 
4. Expected date of adult emergence. 
5. Collection of adults. 
6. Problems encountered with the culture 
during production. 
 
Biology of Host  (Melanaspis glomerata  (Gree) 
(Diaspididae: Hemiptera): 
The adult female is soft bodied, small, disc lik e, 
eyeless and degenerated. Males are winged and 
short lived. The scales (protective covering) of 
males are usually oval and oblong whereas in case 
of females it is round and circular. Females are 
ovoviviparous and never come out from her scale 
covering. 
Adult males after coming out from under surface 
of the scale begin to move on the internodes in 
search of the female. After copulation female 
produces nymphs. Female is ovoviviparous and 
produces about 400 nymphs during her life time. 
The nymphs that hatch out inside body come out 
through the genital aperture of the female. The 
young tiny yellowish nymph which comes out from 
beneath the mother scale crawls on cane surface 
and settle down on one of the internodes. Nymphs 
insert its proboscis into the plant ti ssues and suck 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
116 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
the cell sap. Once it settles down never moves from 
that spot. Nymph secretes a protective covering 
(scale) around it -self inside which metamorphosis 
occurs and adults are formed. The pest remains 
active almost throughout the year and under South-
Indian conditions 4 - 9 overlapping generations are 
completed in a year. The males complete their life 
cycle in about 20-25 days whereas the females take 
about 40-45 days for the same purpose. 
 
Host production: 
Material required: 
Sugarcane setts, formalin, Benlate, paraffin wax, 
plastic trays, piece of mosquito net, black cloth, 
cement pots, cages, iron frames. 
Procedure: 
M. glomerata is ovoviviparous in reproduction. 
Six to eight month old healthy canes without any 
fissures and with undamaged buds of susceptible 
varieties like Co671, Co4133 and Co740 are 
selected for culturing the scale insect. The cane 
pieces are cut into 40 -45 cm pieces bearing three 
internodes each. The sets are surface sterilized with 
formalin and 2% Benlate, shade dried and the cu t 
ends dipped in moulten paraffin wax to prevent 
fungal infection and drying. The sets are arranged 
in plastic trays (30X40X6.5 cm) the inner sides of 
which are painted black or in breeding cages 0.3 sq 
meter. The initial culture of the host insect is started 
by bringing cane scrapings bearing full grown 
scales from heavily infested fields. The scrapings 
are places over a piece of mosquito net helping 
them spread over prepared cane pieces horizontally. 
The trays are covered with a black cloth and 
fastened w ith a string. Similarly the cages are 
covered with black cloth to obtain better setting and 
good culture by creating dark conditions. After 48 
hrs, the sets are rotated to ensure uniform 
infestation. Once pure culture is established, the 
subsequent infesta tion is obtained by placing the 
freshly prepared canes in close contact with well 
infested canes. After 72 hrs they are planted by 
removing the wax from one side in sterilized moist 
sand in cages or in cement pots 62X62X30 cm 
containing jungle soil. The pl anted sets are covered 
with polyvinyl cages 20 cm in height and 15 cm in 
diameter and covered with lid on which window is 
cut and fixed with net to provide aeration. 
The inoculated cane sets are placed in specially 
designed iron frames (45X35X20 cm) contai ning 
5X5 cm squares and sterilized water. The water in 
the tray is changed once in two days. 
 
Precaution: 
The initial culture of M. glomerata  collected 
from the field should be freed from all natural 
enemies. The sets used for producing should be 
disinfected and waxed before use. The shriveled 
sets if any should be discarded. Only highly 
susceptible cane varieties should be used to produce 
healthy scale insects in required quantity. 
 
Maintenance of quality: 
Culture should be a pure one, free from live 
product contaminants, parasitoids, diseases, etc. 
 
Maintenance of history sheet: 
The following information is furnished. 
1. Date of infestation with scale insect. 
2. Scientific name of the species. 
3. Source of scale insect. 
4. Different developmental periods. 
5. Problems enc ountered with the culture 
during production. 
 
Reference: 
Leppla, N.C, Bloem, K. A. and Luck, R.F.2002. 
Quality control for mass -reared arthropods. 
Proceedings of the Eighth and Ninth Workshops 
of the IOBC Working Group on Quality Control 
of Mass-Reared Arthropods.pp 171.  
Murali B. R.K. and Suresh K. 2006.  Comparative 
biology and predatory potential of black beetle, 
Chilocorus nigrita (Fab.) on three scale insects. 
Journal of Entomological Research . 30(2): 159 
– 164. 
National repository of natural enemies of crop pests 
and weeds. Final technical report (01-04-1997 to 
31-03-2000). Project Directorate of Biological 
Control (Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research) Hebbal, Bellary road, Bangalore - 560 
024. 
Sahayaraj,K. 2004. Indian insect predators in 
biological control. Daya pullishing house. 
1123/74. Devaram Park, Tri Nagar, Delhi -
110035.  
Samways, M.1. 1984. Biology and economic value 
of the scale predator Chilocorus nigritus  (F.). 
(Coccinellidae). Biocontrol News and 
Information. 4: 91-105. 
Singh, S.P.1995. Technology for Production of 
Natural Enemies. Project Directorate of 
Biological Control., Post Bag No. 2491. H.A. 
Farm Post, Bangalore-560024 (India). 
http://www.ipcnet.org/n/bpd/scaleInsects/scaleInsec
ts_control.htm 
http://www.nbaii.res.in 
http://tnau.ac.in 
http://www.yourarticlelibrary.com 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
117 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Mass production of Scymnus coccivora 
Ayyar 
 
Introduction: 
Species of Scymnus are well known in tropical 
areas as predators of scale insects, mealybugs, 
aphids and other soft -bodied arthropods.  Scymnus 
species occur widely in tropical areas and have 
been used in many classical biological control 
programmes. According to CABI BIOCAT 
database, more than 50 species of this genus have 
been introduced in various countries to control 27 
species of homopteran pest s belonging to 6 
families, mainly Pseudococcidae (48.1%), 
Diaspididae (14.8%), Aldegidae (14.8%), 
Aleyrodidae (11.1%), Aphididae (7.4 %) and 
Coccidae (3.7%). Scymnus spp. have been used 
most successfully in biological programmes against 
mealybugs (Pseudoco ccidae) and woolly aphids 
(Adelgidae). 
 
Taxonomy, Identification and distribution of 
common species 
Kingdom: Animalia 
Class: Insecta 
Order: Coleoptera 
Family: Coccinellidae 
 
S
N 
speci
es 
Host Crop Distrib
ution 
1.  Scymnus 
coccivora Ayyar Mealybus, 
Scale 
insects, 
aphids, 
whitefly, 
mites, etc. 
brinjal, 
cotton, guava, 
mango, 
mulberry, 
teak, citrus, 
grapevine, 
etc. 
Widely 
distribut
ed 
through
out 
India. 
2.  brunnescens 
Mealybugs, 
aphids, 
mites, 
midges, 
white fly, 
etc. 
brinjal, 
cotton, guava, 
mango, 
mulberry, 
teak, citr us, 
grapevine, 
etc. 
Widely 
distribut
ed 
through
out 
India. 
3.  nubilus Mulsant Mealybugs, 
aphids, 
mites, 
midges, 
white fly, 
etc. 
brinjal, 
cotton, guava, 
mango, 
mulberry, 
teak, citrus, 
grapevine, 
etc. 
Widely 
distribut
ed 
through
out 
India. 
4.  latemaculatus M
otschulsky 
Aphids, 
mealy 
bugs, 
scales. 
brinjal, 
cotton, guava, 
mango, 
mulberry, 
teak, citrus, 
grapevine, 
etc. 
Widely 
distribut
ed 
through
out 
India. 
5.  castaneus Sicard Aphids, 
Mealybug. 
brinjal, 
cotton, guava, 
mango, 
mulberry, 
teak, citrus, 
grapevine, 
etc. 
Widely 
distribut
ed 
through
out 
India. 
 
Biology of Scymnus coccivora Aiyar 
Length 1.70 -1.90 mm, width 1.20 -1.30 mm. 
Form elongate oval, moderately convex. Ground 
colour pale golden yellow to yellowish brown, with 
dark purplish brown markings on elytra. Elytra with 
an hour glass -shaped longitudinal marking in basal 
half, which sometimes appears as two distinct 
markings; two small circular spots present in 
posterior half; elytral pattern variable, sometimes 
with only posterior spots present or uniformly 
yellowish bro wn, completely devoid of markings. 
Antenna 11 -segmented. Prosternal intercoxal 
process with a pair of carinae, broader towards 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
118 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
posterior. Postcoxal line complete and semicircular, 
area adjacent to postcoxal line smooth. Male 
genitalia (Figs. 4-6) as illustrated. Larva with dorsal 
surface covered with white waxy filaments. 
The duration of life stages was shorter during 
summer (15.65 days in April) and longer during 
winter (26.52 days in December). The male to 
female ratio of beetle population was 1:0.95. Eac h 
female S. coccivora  laid 84.7 eggs on an average 
when reared on grape mealybug,  Maconellicoccus 
hirsutus Green. The percentage hatchability of the 
eggs was 89.86. The longevity of male and female 
beetles, respectively was 61.7 and 66.8 days when 
fed on g rape mealybug. The adults were the 
potential feeders of mealybug eggs when compared 
with the grubs. Adult consumed 864.4 eggs, 
whereas larval consumption was 314.2 eggs during 
the life time. Preference for feeding was evident 
with M. hirsutus followed by  Ferrisia 
virgata and Plunococcus spp. The egg, grub, 
prepupal and pupal stages occupy 4.13 – 4.20, 9.15 
– 11.75, 1.25 – 1.40, 5.25 – 5.60 days respectively 
when the coccinellid is reared on different stages of  
M. hirsutus . The predatory grub consume 307.7 
eggs or 62.2 nymphs or 6.55 adult females of  M. 
hirsutus in confinement. 
 
Mass production of Scymnus coccivora: 
 
Material required: 
Rearing cages, Red pumpkins, mealy bugs, 
motorised aspirator. 
 
Procedure: 
S. coccivora is multiplied on the ripe pumpkins 
infested by Planococcus citris  as described under 
P.citri. The 15 – 20 day old mealy bugs are exposed 
to adult beetles. The beetles distribute their eggs 
singly or occasionally more than one egg is laid at a 
place. The eggs laid hatch in 4 -5 days. The larval 
and pupal development is completed in 10 and 7 
days respectively. The first adult emerges in 20 
days time. Adult S. coccivora are harvested with a 
motorised aspirator within 4 -7 weeks after initial 
oviposition. The beetles emerging daily are caged, 
allowed to mate and pass their preoviposition 
period. The beetles are then either field relased or 
used for continuation of culture. 
 
Precaution: 
All due precautions should be taken to avoid 
scarcity of food for the grubs to avoid cannibalism 
by grubs. All the pu mpkins showing sign of rotting 
should be properly incinerated. Apart from the 
precautions required for handling pumpkins and the 
parasitoid, ringing the trunks leaving one foot away 
with a band of 5% diazinon granules before release 
of parasitoid should be adopted. 
 
Maintenance of quality: 
Sufficient food should be provided to the 
predators. Culture should be a pure one. Absence of 
live product contaminants, maintenance of purity 
and viability of the species are of great importance 
in order to maintain the quality. Breeding with field 
collected wild population after every third 
generation is advisable. Maintain strict hygienic 
conditions.  
 
Transport: 
S. coccivora is supplied as adults packed per 
certain number in plastic tubes with filter paper as 
carrier. 
  
Field release: 
Two releases of Scymnus coccivora @ 10 grubs 
per infested tree at monthly interval for suppressing 
the population of mealy bugs in fruit trees. 
 
Dose:  
Release predatory lady bird beetles Scymnus 
coccivora @ 250 adult beetles/ac, or 10 S. 
coccivora beetles per tree or 600 -2500 per hectare 
are released. 
 
Maintenance of history sheet: 
The following information is furnished. 
1. No. of adults released per cage. 
2. Date of release. 
3. Different developmental periods. 
4. Expected date of adult emergence. 
5. Collection of adults. 
6. Problems encountered with the culture 
during production. 
 
  
 
Biology of Host (Planococcus citri): 
Eggs are deposited as white cottony masses 
called ovisacs giving the appearance of cotton 
spread. The glossy, light yellow eggs are oval a nd 
approximately 0.3 mm long. A female can lay from 
300 to 600 eggs in her life period, which are 
deposited in groups of 5 to 20. Depending on the 
season, egg hatch may occur after 6 - 10 days or 
several weeks. First instar female and male nymphs 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
119 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
are called crawlers. The nymphs take 6 to 10 weeks 
to reach maturity. The nymphs are yellow, oval -
shaped with red eyes, and covered with white waxy 
particles. Female nymphs have four instars. Males 
differ greatly; they have three instars and a pre -
pupal stage. It i s only the males that can produce a 
cottony-appearing cocoon and pupate. Adult size 
ranges in length from 3 mm (females) to 4.5 mm 
(males). The females are wingless, white to light 
brown in color, with brown legs and antennae. The 
body of adult females is coated with white wax and 
bears a characteristic faint gray stripe along their 
dorsal side. Females can live for up to 29 days 
depending on the host plant. Mealybugs remain 
motile throughout their life cycle, with the 
exception of the male pupa. 
 
Host production:  
Material required: 
Wooden cage, white cloth or with nylon mesh, 
plastic ring, red pumpkin. 
 
Procedure: 
P.citri is produced on ripe pumpkins. The 
pumpkins are selected with ridges and groves with 
a small stalk which makes the handling easy. The 
pumpkins are thoroughly washed with tap water to 
remove dust particles. The pumpkins are then 
dipped in 0.1% (one gm/litre) solution of Benlate or 
Bavistin to kill all the fungal rot pathogens. The 
injured pumpkins are discarded or the wounds are 
plugged with hot paraffin wax. 
Once the pumpkins get completely dried under 
shade. Each pumpkin is infested with P.citri 
crawlers (1 st instar mealy bugs) maintained in 
infestation room (in case the crawlers are not 
available, ovisacs of the mealy bug are placed over 
the pumpkin the crawlers emerging form ovisacs 
then settle on pumpkin). Each of the infested 
pumpkin is placed in 30 cm 3 wooden cage all sides 
of which are covered by white cloth or with nylon 
mesh. The cage has several variations but the one 
with slanting top and fixed with a slanting glass top 
and front sleeve has become quite popular. The 
pumpkin in the cage is kept from the front door 
opening on a round plastic ring. Such pumpkins are 
covered with mealy bugs in 15 days and the mealy 
bugs mature in another 12-15 days time. 
 
Precaution: 
Only the best quality of pumpkins should be 
selected for mealy bug rearing programme. Any 
pumpkin showing signs of rotting should be 
discarded immediately. Surface sterilize the 
pumpkin by dipping in a solution of 0.1% Benla te 
or Bavistin to kill all the fungal rot pathogens. 
A sequence of pumpkin infestation cycle by mealy 
bugs has to be maintained to ensure availability of 
right stage of mealy bugs for exposing to the 
predators and parasitoids. 
 
Maintenance of quality: 
Culture should be a pure one, free from live 
product contaminants, parasitoids, diseases, etc. 
 
Maintenance of history sheet: 
The following information is furnished. 
1. Date of infestation with mealybug. 
2. Scientific name of the species. 
3. Source of mealy bug. 
4. Different developmental periods. 
5. Problems encountered with the culture 
during production. 
 
 
 
Reference: 
Leppla, N.C, Bloem, K. A. and Luck, R.F.2002. 
Quality control for mass -reared arthropods. 
Proceedings of the Eighth and Ninth Workshops 
of the IOBC Working Group on Quality Control 
of Mass-Reared Arthropods.pp 171. 
National repository of natural enemies of crop pests 
and weeds. Final technical report (01-04-1997 to 
31-03-2000). Project Directorate of Biological 
Control (Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research) Hebbal, Bellary road, Bangalore - 560 
024. 
Sahayaraj,K. 2004. Indian insect predators in 
biological control. Daya pullishing house. 
1123/74. Devaram Park, Tri Nagar, Delhi -
110035. 
Singh, S.P.1995. Technology for Production of 
Natural Enemies. Project Direc torate of 
Biological Control., Post Bag No. 2491. H.A. 
Farm Post, Bangalore-560024 (India). 
http://ecoport.org/ 
http://entnemdept.ufl.edu/ 
http://www.nbaii.res.in 
 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
120 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
Mass production of Anthocorid bugs 
 
Introduction: 
Anthocorid bugs, particularly many species  of 
the genus Orius (Heteroptera, Anthocoridae) are 
important beneficial insects for various agro 
systems feeding primarily upon thrips, aphids, 
leafhoppers, psyllids, spider mites, eggs and young 
larvae of several crop pests. 
Cardiastethus pygmaeus  Poppius, C. 
affinis Poppius and C. exiguus Poppius are key 
predators of coconut leaf caterpillars Opisina 
arenosella Walker and Xylocoris (Arrostelus)  
flavipes (Reuter) is associated with pest of stored 
grains/commodities.  
 
Taxonomy, Identification and distribu tion of 
common species 
Kingdom: Animalia 
Class: Insecta 
Order: Hemiptera 
Family: Anthocoridae. 
 
S
N 
species Host Crop Distribut
ion 
1.  Orius 
tantillus  
(Motschul
sky) 
thrips, 
mites, 
Helicoverp
a 
armigera, 
etc 
Sunflo
wer, 
cotton, 
chillies, 
marigol
d, etc. 
Widely 
distribut
ed in 
India.  
2.  Cardiastet
hus 
exiguous 
Poppius 
Opisina 
arenosella  
coconut Widely 
distribut
ed in 
India.  
3.  Affinis 
Poppius 
Opisina 
arenosella  
coconut Widely 
distribut
ed in 
India.  
4.  pygmaeus 
Poppius 
Opisina 
arenosella 
coconut Widely 
distribut
ed in  
India.  
5.  Xylocoris 
flavipes 
(Reuter) 
Ephestia 
kuehniella, 
Oryzaephil
us spp., 
Tribolium 
castaneum,
etc. 
Stored 
grains 
Widely 
distribut
ed in 
India.  
 
Biology of Anthocorid bugs: 
In most species the eggs hatch in 4 -7 days and 
there are 5-6 nymphal instars, the duration for each 
instar being passed in 3-6 days. The adult males for 
4-45 and female for 6 -61 days. Each female is 
capable of producing about 150 eggs. 
 
Mass production of Anthocorid bugs: 
 
Material required: 
Breeding cage, polystyrene wool, condense d 
milk, water. 
 
Procedure:  
Orius spp. Are reared in a specially designed 
cage which is made by converting a plastic playing 
card box into a breeding cage. Windows are cut on 
the top and bottom are replaced by plastic net to 
ensure proper aeration. On one lateral side a small 
window is cut which is replaced by a removable 
feeding pad. On the opposite side a similar window 
is cut and replaced by removable polystyrene wool. 
Once the cage are ready, twenty pairs of Orius spp. 
are introduced by removing one of the lateral 
opening. The food is provided (one part of water 
mixed with two parts of the condensed milk) on the 
lateral pad. The eggs are laid on the polystyrenes 
pad which is replaced daily with a fresh pad. The 
food also replaced daily and once in a week  the 
entire assembly is changed and replaced by a fresh 
sterilized unit.  A number of such units are set for 
rearing the required numbers of bugs. The cages are 
further stacked in a cage where a temperature of 25-
26°C and relative humidity of 70 -80% is 
maintained. The predatory bugs could also be 
reared on Corcyra eggs. 
 
Precaution:  
Among the precautions, the regular collection of 
bug eggs will avoid cannibalism and observance of 
strict hygienic conditions will prevent the attack of 
moulds. 
 
Maintenance of quality: 
 Check the quality of the culture. If the fecundity 
is reduced, rear at least the stock culture on Corcyra 
eggs or Spodoptera eggs to bring back the original 
productivity. Sufficient food should be offered to 
the predators. Maintain strict hygieni c condition. 
Breeding with field collected wild population of the 
same species after every third generation is 
advisable. 
 
Transport: 
Bugs are packed in plastic containers provided 
with sufficient Corcyra eggs and corrugated paper 
sheet. 
 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
121 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
Field release 
Anthocorid bugs have gained prominence 
recently. Their conservation and application in 
cotton ecosystem will be big boost in protection 
technology for bollworms, aphids, thrips and mites 
on cotton and thrips , mites, lepidopterans 
particularly Helicoverpa arm igera on sunflower. 
Cardiastethus exiguus  can be utilized against 
coconut black -headed caterpillar,  Opisina 
arenosella Walker, along with  C. affinis  Poppius, 
which it closely resembles. 
 
Dose: 
The dosage of release is being refined but 
coinciding the relea se of 50,000 bugs in 100 spots 
with initiation of flowering in cotton and 2 bugs per 
sunflower head will give effective suppression. 
In case of  Cardiastethus exiguus  Poppius three to 
six releases of 50 adults or nymphs per palm at 
weekly intervals are reco mmended with the first 
release coinciding with egg laying by O. arenosella. 
 
Maintenance of history sheet 
The following information is furnished. 
1. Date of egg laying. 
2. Date of hatching. 
3. Date of moulting of each instar. 
4. Problems encountered with the basin during 
production 
5. Biology of Host 
6. 6. Host production: (add Photograph/ 
Sketch where ever required) 
 
Reference: 
Leppla, N.C, Bloem, K. A. and Luck, R.F.2002. 
Quality control for mass -reared arthropods. 
Proceedings of the Eighth and Ninth Workshops 
of the IOBC Working Group on Quality Control 
of Mass-Reared Arthropods.pp 171. 
Manley, G. V. 1976. Immature Stages and Biology 
of Orius tantillus  Hemiptera Heteroptera 
Anthocoridae Inhabiting Rice Fields In West 
Malaysia. Entomological News. 87(3&4):103 -
109.  
National repository of natural enemies of crop pests 
and weeds. Final technical report (01-04-1997 to 
31-03-2000). Project Directorate of Biological 
Control (Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research) Hebbal, Bellary road, Bangalore - 560 
024. 
Sahayaraj,K. 2004. Indi an insect predators in 
biological control. Daya pullishing house. 
1123/74. Devaram Park, Tri Nagar, Delhi -
110035. 
Singh, S.P.1995. Technology for Production of 
Natural Enemies. Project Directorate of 
Biological Control., Post Bag No. 2491. H.A. 
Farm Post, Bangalore-560024 (India). 
Thomas, J. M. G., Shirk P. D. and  Shapiro, J. P. 
2012. Mass rearing of a tropical minute pirate 
bug, Orius pumilio  (Hemiptera: Anthocoridae). 
Florida Entomologist. 95(1):202-204. 
http://www.nbaii.res.in 
 
 
  
 
  
Adult dorsal view Eggs 
 
  
Orius (Dimorphella) tantillus (Motschulsky) 
 
 
Cardiastethus exiguus Poppius 
 
 
Cardiastethus pygmaeus 
 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
122 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
Mass production of Reduviid predators 
 
Introduction: 
Reduviids or assassin bugs are important natural 
enemies of Helicoverpa armigera and several other 
pests. On pigeonpea Coranus sp. atricapillus 
Distant and C. spinicutis  Reuter, Rhinocorus 
marginatus (Fabricius), R. fuscipes Stal and several 
other species have been recorded feeding on H. 
armigera. Similarly  these species have also been 
recorded on tobacco Coranus sp. atricapillus and 
Harpector costalis Stal are particularly abundant. It 
is quite interesting because on these two crops the 
diversity of natural enemies of H. armigera is not 
high as compared to other crops. The high longevity 
and prolonged predation is an advantage which 
could be harnessed by incorporating the reduviid 
bugs in biointensive IPM in relatively less preferred 
(by other natural enemies) crop ecosystems such as 
chickpea, pegeionpea and  tobacco as well as in 
stable ecosystems such as orchards, forests etc. 
 
Taxonomy, Identification and distribution of 
common species 
Kingdom: Animalia 
Class: Insecta 
Order: Hemiptera 
Family: Reduviidae 
 
S
N 
species Host Crop Distrib
ution 
1.  Isyndus 
heros (Fabr
icius) 
Generalist 
predator. 
Pulses Widely 
distrib
uted in 
India. 
2.  Endochus 
inornatus 
Stal. 
Generalist 
predator. 
Pulses Widely 
distrib
uted in 
India. 
3.  Rhynocoris 
marginatus 
Fab 
Generalist 
predator. 
Host 
includes 
H.armiger
a, S.litura, 
A.craccivo
ra, etc.  
cotton, 
soybean, 
tomato 
and 
groundnu
t, pigeon 
pea 
Widely 
distrib
uted in 
India. 
4.  R. fuscipes Generalist 
predator.  
Cotton, 
Okra, 
Ground 
nut, 
pigeon 
pea 
Widely 
distrib
uted in 
India. 
5.  R. 
longifrons 
Generalist 
predator.  
Cotton, 
Okra, 
Widely 
distrib
Pulses uted in 
India. 
 
Biology of Reduviid predators: 
Most of the reduviids have fairly long life cycle; 
the egg, nymphal, adult male and female period 
varies from 8 -11, 42 -47, 85 -125 and 85 -137 days 
respectively. The female of different species lays 
eggs in batches of 10-28. The total fecundity varies 
from 42 -205 eggs. Each individual species is 
capable of consuming 63 to 790 larvae of H. 
armigera or Spodoptera litura in its life time. 
 
Mass production of Reduviid predators: 
 
Material required: 
Card sheets (10X3.5 cms), cellotape, jars (15 cm 
dia and 25 cm height), fourth and fifth instar 
Cocryra larvae, cotton, plastic vials (30 ml 
volume). 
 
Procedure: 
This technique was developed at IARI. In this 
technique, the head and thorax of Corcyra 
cephalonica larvae are fir mly affixed on strips of 
card sheets (10X3.5 cms) using cellotape. This 
prevents the C. cephalonica  larvae from webbing 
silk, cannibalism and spoiling the culture of the 
bugs. The larvae once fixed do not require any 
food, but the predators are attracted t o strike on the 
wagging abdomen of fixed C. cephalonica  larvae. 
The mass multiplication is done in jars (15 cm dia 
and 25 cm height) at room temperature (24 -30oC). 
Each card sheet can accommodate 70 C. 
cephalonica larvae and 25 pairs of reduviids are 
released per jar. Food is changed every alternate 
day. The egg batches laid by the female bugs in the 
laboratory were incubated in moist cotton swabs in 
small plastic vials (30 ml volume) to provide 
humidity. 
Rediviids- Rhynocoris spp., Acanthaspis spp., 
Sphedenolestes varibilis , Acanthaspis 
quineuespinosa (Fabricius), Brassivola hystrix  
Distant, Coranus sp., Endochus inornatus  Stal., 
Endochus umbrinus , E. parvispinus  Distant, 
Haematorrhopus linnaei  Stal, H. nigroviolaceus  
Reuter, Irantha armipes  Stal, Isyndus heros 
(Fabricius) and few others could be multiplied by 
adopting this technique. 
Endochus inornatus  is the best predator 
followed by Coranus sp. Could be used against 
pests of pulses with a provision for natural or semi -
permanent refuges for surviving the odd seasons. 
 
Precaution: 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
123 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
Maintenance of sanitation has maximum 
relevance because of the long life cycle and adult 
longevity. In released fields wherever feasible, 
natural or semipermanent refuge should be made 
available for surviving the odd season. 
 
Maintenance of quality: 
Check the quality of the culture. Check for the 
fecundity of the species. Sufficient food should be 
offered to the predators. Maintain strict hygienic 
condition. Breeding with field collected wild 
population of the same species after eve ry third 
generation is advisable. 
 
Transport: 
Packed in plastic containers provided with 
sufficient larval cards. 
 
Field release: 
R.fuscipes & R. longifrons have been  
successfully utilized in cotton in India. R. 
marginatus and R. fuscipes have been successfully 
utilized in groundnut in India. Coranus sp. could be 
released for the suppression of H. armigera  
infesting pulses. Coranus sp. And Harpactor 
costalis could be released in tobacco ecosystem for 
the suppression of H. armigera  and other pests.  
About to hatch eggs of these predators pasted on 
cards could be uniformly distributed in endemic 
areas and nymphal instars may be released under 
the foliage with the help of small wet paintbrushes. 
 
Dose:  
20000 nymphal instars per hectare. 50000 eggs 
per hectare. 
 
Maintenance of history sheet: 
The following information is furnished. 
 Date of preparation of larval cards. 
 Date of hatching. 
 Date of moulting of each instar. 
 Number of generations. 
 Problems encountered with the basin during 
production 
 
 
  
Rhynocoris fuscipes Rhynocoris longifrons 
 
 
Rhynocoris marginatus 
 
 
Isyndus heros (Fabricius) 
 
 
  
Irantha armipes (Stål)   Acanthaspis sp. 
 
Biology of Host (Corcyra cephalonica): 
The eggs are oval and measure 0.5 x 0.3 mm.  
The white surface is sculptured and has a sho rt 
nipple-like process at one end.  The larvae are 
generally creamish – white except for the head 
capsule and the prothoracic tergite, which are 
brown. There are well -developed prolegs on 
abdominal segments 3 -6 and 10. A fully matured 
larva measures 15 mm. The last-instar larva spins a 
closely woven, very tough, double -layered cocoon 
in which it develops into a dark -brown pupa.  The 
anterior portion of the cocoon has a line of 
weakness through which the adult emerges.  The 
adults are small.  The hind-wings are pale-buff, and 
the fore -wings are mid -brown or greyish -brown 
with thin vague lines of darker brown colour along 
the wing veins. The males are smaller than the 
females. 
Sexual activity usually begins shortly after adult 
emergence. There is a pre -oviposition period of 
about 2 days.  Egg-laying mainly occurs during the 
night. The greatest numbers are laid on the second 
and third days after emergence, although 
oviposition may continue throughout life. Eggs take 
about 2 -3 days to hatch.  Optimum conditions for 
larval development of  C. cephalonica  are 30 – 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
124 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
32.50C and 70 per cent RH, at which, the period 
from egg hatch to adult emergence is only 26 -27 
days. There is considerable variation in the number 
of larval instars; however, males generally have 7 
and females ha ve 8.  The last -instar larvae pupate 
within the food.  The adults emerge through the 
anterior end of the cocoon, where there is a line of 
weakness. The sex ratio is 1:1.  The adult moth is 
nocturnal and is most active at nightfall. 
 
Host production:  
Material required: 
 
Absorbent cotton  Storage racks 
Blotting paper Streptomycin sulphate 
Broken Pearl millet grain Rubber band 
Camel hair brush Measuring cylinder 
Enamel Tray Oven 
Honey Home milling machine 
Markin cloth Sieves 
Mosquito net Formaldehyde 40% 
Moth aspirator 
(collector) 
Filter paper 
Oviposition drums Moth scale egg separator 
Plastic basin Face masks 
Shoe brush Storing drums 
Soap Ground nut kernel 
Specimen tube Sulphur (WP) 
Yeast Coarse weighing balance 
 
Procedure: 
Preparation of rearing basins 
The basins (16” dia) used 
for Corcyra multiplication are thoroughly cleaned 
with 0.5% detergent wash and rinsing in tap water 
followed by wiping with dry, clean – used towel 
and shade drying. Whenever the trays are emptied 
after a cycle of rearing, they have to be cleaned 
preferably to 2 per cent formaldehyde and returned 
to storage until further use. On reuse the cleaning 
steps are repeated. 
 
Preparation of bajra medium for Corcyra 
a) The required quantities of bajra grains are 
coarsely milled and brok en into 2 -3 pieces in a 
milling machine. The broken grains are heat 
sterilized at 100 0C for 1 hour to eliminate the 
residual population of stored product insects viz., 
Rhizopertha dominica , Sitotroga 
cerealella, Tribolium castaneum  and fungal 
contaminants. Upon sterilization the grains are 
cooled under fan in a clean area.  The grains are 
then transferred to plastic basins @ 2.5 kg/basin. 
b) Groundnut kernel in required quantity is broken 
using a pounding machine or a mechanical 
blender (domestic mixer). Then 1 00 g of the 
broken kernel is transferred to each basin and 
the contents are hand mixed thoroughly. 
c) Dry yeast (Bakers) and wettable sulfur is added 
@ 5g/ basin and the contents are mixed 
thoroughly. A spray of 10 ml of 0.01 -0.05% 
streptomycin sulfate and mi xing of the contents 
follows this.  This medium is used for 
rearing Corcyra larvae. 
d) The number of basins required for egg 
infestation is calculated and the medium is 
prepared accordingly. 
Preparation of Corcyra eggs 
The primary source of  Corcyra eggs is rep uted 
laboratories, commercial producers for bulk 
preparation. If it is intended to begin the production 
with nucleus colony, the adult moths can be 
collected from warehouses where the food materials 
are stored. 
a) The eggs used for building up the colony 
of Corcyra have to be free from contaminants 
like the moth scales and broken limbs and not 
exposed to UV light. 
b) The collections of overnight laid eggs are 
measured volumetrically to ascertain the number 
of trays that can be infested with eggs. A cc of 
eggs is known to contain approximately 16000 – 
18000 eggs. 
 
Infestation of medium with eggs 
The overall production scheme involves initial 
infestation of the Pearl millet medium with Corcyra 
eggs in desired quantities.  This is accomplished by 
sprinkling the freely flowing eggs on the surface of 
the medium in individual basins. Per basin 0.5 cc 
eggs of  Corcyra is infested. The basins are then 
covered with clean  markin cloth and held tightly 
with rubber fasteners. The basins are carefully 
transferred to the racks.  
 
Handling the trays during larval development 
The larvae that hatch out in 3 -4 days begin to 
feed the fortified Bajra medium. At this stage, light 
webbings are noticed on the surface. As the larvae 
grow up they move down.  During this period the 
larvae are allowed to grow undisturbed in the trays. 
 
Handling of adults 
The adults begin to emerge in 28 -30 days after 
infestation of the eggs. The adults can be seen on 
the inner side of the markin cloth. They are either 
aspirated with mechanical moth collector or 
collected with specimen tubes. The whole operation 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
125 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
is carried out in a tent of mosquito net.  This 
prevents the large-scale escape of the moths, which 
if uncontrolled can migrate to the storage area and 
spoil the grains stored by laying eggs.  Workers 
involved in the collection of moths should wear 
face moths continuously to avoid inhalation of 
scales. The moths collected are transferred to the 
oviposition drum @ 1000 pairs per drum at a time.  
The oviposition drums of size 30 x 20 cm are made 
of galvanized iron. The drums rest on tripod frames 
with legs of height 5cm.  The bottoms of the drums 
are provided with wire meshes that enable 
collection of eggs. The walls of the drums have two 
vents (ventilation holes) opposed to each other. The 
vents are again covered with wire mesh. The lids of 
the drums have handles besides slots for 
introducing the moths and adult feed.  The 
oviposition drums filled in a day are maintained for 
four to seven successive days for egg collection 
after which are emptied and cleaned for nex t cycle 
of use.  
The adults are provided feed containing honey 
solution. The adult feed is prepared by mixing 50 
ml honey with 50 ml water and 5 capsules of 
vitamin E (Evion). The feed is stored in refrigerator 
and used as and when required.  Piece of cotto n 
wool tied with a thread is soaked in the solution and 
inserted into the drum through the slot at the top.  
From a basin, moths can be collected upto 90 days 
after which the number of moths emerging 
dwindles down and keeping the basins is not 
economical for the producer. 
 
Handling of eggs 
The moths lay the eggs in large numbers 
loosely. The scales and broken limbs are also found 
in larger quantities along with the eggs.  They cause 
potential hazard to the workers after years of 
working in  Corcyra laboratory. To minimize the 
risk of scales freely floating in the air, the 
oviposition drums are placed on sheets of filter 
paper in enamel trays which trap effectively the 
scales. Sets of several oviposition drums are kept in 
ventilated place near an exhaust fan to enable the 
workers comfort.  Daily morning the oviposition 
drums are lifted up and the wire -mesh bottoms are 
cleaned gently with a shoe brush so that the eggs 
and remnants of scales and limbs settled on the 
mesh are collected along with those on the filter 
paper. The collections are cleaned by gently rolling 
the eggs on filter paper to another container.  Then 
they are passed to sieves in series and finally clean 
eggs are collected.  The eggs are quantified in 
measuring cylinders and used for building up the 
stocks and natural enemy production.  
About 100 pairs of adults produce 1.5 cc of eggs in 
4 days laying period inside the oviposition drums.  
From each basin an average of 2500 moths are 
collected. Hence from each basin 18.00 – 20.00 cc 
of eggs can be obtained in 90 days. 
 
Precaution: 
Bacterial diseasemay affect the Corcyra culture. 
To control this, Streptomycin sulphate is added to 
the crushed graind at the rate of 0.2 gm/kg and 
mixed thoroughly. Occationally the mite Pyemotes 
ventricosus (Newport) may contaminate the culture 
and affect egg -laying and larval development. If 
mites are observed, thye racks, cages, boxes etc. 
should be disinfected with formalin and placed in 
the sun for six hours. Boxes containing developing 
larvae should be dusted with sulphur s o that a thin 
layer of sulphur is present over the grains. If 
infestation is severe, it may be necessary to treat 
with the acaricide dicofol (Kelthane). For this, 
muslin sheets are dipped in a 0.05% solution of 
dicifol and air dried for a couple of hours. These 
sheets are spread over the grains in boxes. Mites 
coming in contact with the treated cloth are killed 
rapidly. Bracon hebetor  Say must be kept away 
from infesting the culture of C. cephalonica. 
 
Maintenance of quality:  Accurate information is 
needed on the history of individual basins.  
 
Maintenance of history sheet: 
The following information is furnished. 
1. Date of egg infestation 
2. Date of preparation of feed 
3. Source of egg 
4. Expected date of adult emergence 
5. Daily collection of moths 
6. Problems encountered with the basin during 
production 
 
Reference: 
Leppla, N.C, Bloem, K. A. and Luck, R.F.2002. 
Quality control for mass -reared arthropods. 
Proceedings of the Eighth and Ninth Workshops 
of the IOBC Working Group on Quality Control 
of Mass-Reared Arthropods.pp 171. 
National repository of natural enemies of crop pests 
and weeds. Final technical report (01-04-1997 to 
31-03-2000). Project Directorate of Biological 
Control (Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research) Hebbal, Bellary road, Bangalore - 560 
024. 
Sahayaraj K.  2002. Small scale laboratory rearing 
of a reduviid predator , Rhynocoris marginatus  
Fab. (hemiptera: reduviidae) on corcyra 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
126 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
cephalonica Stainton larvae by larval card 
method. Journal of Central European 
Agriculture. 3 (2): 137-147. 
Sahayaraj, K. and  Martin P. 2003. Assessment of 
Rhynocoris marginatus  (Fab.) (Hemiptera: 
Reduviidae) as augmented control in groundnut 
pests. Journal of Central European Agriculture  
(online), 4 (2): 104-110. 
Sahayaraj,K. 2004. Indian insect predators in 
biological control. Daya p ullishing house. 
1123/74. Devaram Park, Tri Nagar, Delhi -
110035. 
Singh, S.P.1995. Technology for Production of 
Natural Enemies. Project Directorate of 
Biological Control., Post Bag No. 2491. H.A. 
Farm Post, Bangalore-560024 (India). 
http://www.nbaii.res.in 
 
Mass production of Chrysopid predetors 
 
Introduction: 
In India, 65 species of chrysopids belonging to 
21 genera have been recorded from various crop 
ecosystems. Some species are distributed widely 
and are important n atural enemies for aphids and 
other soft bodied insects.  Amongst them, the green 
lacewing Chrysoperla carnea is the most common.  
C. carnea  is now used extensively all over the 
country. It is being mass produced primarily on the 
eggs of rice grain moth, Corcyra cephalonica  in 
India. 
It is being mass released in the field for the 
control of aphids, white flies, mealy bugs and eggs 
and young larvae of lepidepteron pests. The 
Chrysoperla predetors may be used on cotton, 
groundnut, pulses, vegetables, ornamental s and 
several other crops. They also feed on the eggs and 
freshly hatched larvae of Helicoverpa armigera and 
such other caterpillar pests.  They are capable of 
bringing down the population of the pest 
drastically. For mass production of chrysoperla, an 
efficient rearing technique is required.  
 
Taxonomy, Identification and distribution of 
common species 
Kingdom: Animalia 
Class: Insecta 
Order: Neuroptera 
Family: Chrysopidae  
S
N 
species Host Crop Distribu
tion 
1.  Chrysoperla 
carnea 
Generali
st 
predator 
of soft 
Cotton, 
pulses, 
vegetabl
es, 
Widely 
distribut
ed in 
India 
bodied 
insects 
and 
lepidopt
erous 
pests. 
Tobacco
, 
oilseeds, 
fruit 
crops, 
plantatio
n crops, 
etc. 
2.  Mallada 
boninensis 
(Okamoto) 
Generali
st 
predator 
of soft 
bodied 
insects 
and 
lepidopt
erous 
pests. 
Cotton, 
pulses, 
vegetabl
es, 
tobacco, 
oilseeds, 
fruit 
crops, 
plantatio
n 
crops,et
c. 
Widely 
distribut
ed in 
India 
3.  C. 
crassinervis 
Esben-
Peterson 
Generali
st 
predator 
of soft 
bodied 
insects 
and 
lepidopt
erous 
pests. 
Cotton, 
pulses, 
vegetabl
es, 
tobacco, 
oilseeds, 
fruit 
crops, 
plantatio
n 
crops,et
c. 
Widely 
distribut
ed in 
India 
 
Biology of Chrysoperla carnea:  
Chrysoperla are generally green in colour, 
varying in length from 1.0 -1.3 cm. The pre -
oviposition period lasts 3 to 7 days. Adults start 
laying eggs from 5th day onw ards and peak egg -
laying period is between 9 and 23 days after 
emergence. The male longevity is 30 -35 days. 
Adult female lay eggs of 600 -800 eggs/female on 
an average. The eggs are stalked and green in 
colour. The eggs are laid singly or in clusters. Egg 
stage lasts 3 -4 days. The larva has 3 instars and 
after 8-10 days it will form cocoons. Adult emerges 
in 5-7 days from cocoons.  
 
Mass production of Chrysoperla carnea: 
Material required:  
Facilities like rearing room (6 x 6 m), slotted 
angle iron racks, wo rk tables, plastic louvers 60 x 
22 cms with 2.5 cm cubical cells, acrylic sheets to 
cover the louvers, glass vials, adult oviposition 
cages (45 x 30 x 30 cms), plastic louvers, plastic 
containers, scissors and brushes, cotton wool, tissue 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
127 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
paper, sponge, fr uctose, protinex, honey, yeast, 
castor pollen etc. are required for the mass rearing 
of chrysopids.  
 
Procedure:  
In mass production, the adults are fed on various 
types of diets. The larvae are either reared in plastic 
tubes or empty injection vials or in  groups in large 
containers or in individual cells.  The most common 
method for the production of chrysopids is detailed 
below. 
The adults are collected daily and transferred to 
pneumatic glass troughs or G.I. round troughs (30 
cm x 12 cm). Before allowing the adults, the rearing 
troughs are wrapped inside with black sheet which 
act as egg receiving card.  About 250 adults (60% 
females) are allowed into each trough and covered 
with white nylon or georgette cloth secured by 
rubber band. On the cloth outside three bits of foam 
sponge (2 sq.in) dripped in water is kept. Besides an 
artificial protein rich diet is provided in semisolid 
paste form in three spots on the cloth outside.  This 
diet consists of one part of yeast, fructose, honey, 
Proteinex R and water in the ratio 1:1:1:1.  The 
adults lay eggs on the black sheet.  The adults are 
collected daily and allowed into fresh rearing 
troughs with fresh food.  From the old troughs, the 
black paper sheets along with  Chrysopa eggs are 
removed. 
 
Storage and destalking of eggs 
The brown paper sheet kept inside the adult 
rearing troughs contain large number of eggs each 
laid on a stalk or pedicel.  As such the sheets are 
stored at 10 oC in B.O.D. incubator or refrigerator 
for about 21 days.  When the eggs are required for 
culturing or for field release the egg sheets are kept 
at room temperature for a day and the eggs during 
this period turn brown and hatch on 3 days later.  
The first larvae are either taken for culture or for 
recycling or for field release. 
 
Group rearing of grubs 
It is done in GI round basins (28 cm dia) @ 250 
larvae/basin, covered with  markin cloth. The eggs 
of Corcyra cephalonica is given as feeding material 
for the larvae in the laboratory.  For rearing 
500 Chrysopa larvae the total quantity of Corcyra 
eggs re quired is 22 cc @ 5 cc/feeding for five 
feedings in alternate days.  The Chrysopa larvae 
pupate into round white coloured silken cocoons in 
10 days. The cocoons are collected with fine brush 
and transferred into 1 lit plastic containers with 
wire mesh windo w for emergence of adults.  From 
the cocoons, pale green coloured adults with 
transparent lace like wings emerge in 9-10 days. 
 
Individual rearing of grubs 
In the first step of larval rearing, 120 three day 
old chrysopid eggs are mixed with 0.75 ml 
of Corcyra eggs (the embryo of  Corcyra eggs are 
inactivated by keeping them at 2 feet distance from 
15 watt ultraviolet tube light for 45 minutes) in a 
plastic container (27x18x6 cms).  On hatching, the 
larvae start feeding.  On 3rd day the larvae are 
transferred to 2.5 cm cubical cells of plastic louvers 
@ one per cell.  Each louver can hold 192 larvae.  
Corcyra eggs are provided in all the cells of each 
louver by sprinkling through the modified salt 
shaker. Feeding is provided in two doses.  First 
feeding of 1.5 ml Corcyra eggs for 100 larvae and 
second feeding of 2 ml for 100 larvae with a gap of 
3-4 days is done.  Total quantity of Corcyra eggs 
required for rearing 100 chrysopid larvae is 4.25 
ml. The louvers are secured on one side by orgami 
or brown paper sheet and after transfer of larvae 
covered with acrylic sheet and clamped.  Orgami or 
brown paper is used for facilitating pupation and 
clear visibility of eggs.  The louvers are stacked in 
racks. One 2m x 1m x 45 cms angle iron rack can 
hold 100 louvers containing 19,200larvae. 
Cocoons are collected after 24 hours of formation 
(when they get hardened) by removing orgami or 
paper from one side.  The cocoons are placed in 
adult oviposition cages for emergence (Adults are 
sometimes allowed to emerge in louvers and 
released on glass window panes from where they 
are collected using suction pumps). 
 
Precaution:  
Chrysopid eggs should be packed in plastic jars 
with Corcyra eggs, paper strips should be provided 
to minimize contact and cannibalism between 
Chrysopid larvae in cas e larvae emerge during 
transit 
Release should be made in early hours in the 
morning to allow larvae to settle on crop canopy. 
Chrysopid larvae should be released in 
recommended numbers on crop, but on fruit crops, 
release should be made on infested plants/ trees 
only. 
Do not use pesticides in the field where 
predators are released. In case need arises use 
selective/safer pesticides and maintain a waiting 
period of atleast 10 -15 days before making the 
release. 
Do not release chrysopids in egg stage as they 
may get parasitized in the field by egg parasitoids 
or may be eaten by other predators. 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
128 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
Mallada boninensis and M. astur larvae carry trash 
on their body. Do not disturb this trash, the 
disturbance could injure the larvae. 
 
Maintenance of quality: 
Check the q uality of the produce (each lot). If 
the fecundity is reduced, rear at least the stock 
culture on aphids to bring back the original 
productivity. Sufficient food should be provided to 
the predators.  Absence of live product 
contaminants, maintenance of puri ty and viability 
of Chrysopids are of great importance in order to 
maintain the quality. Breeding with field collected 
wild population after every third generation is 
advisable. 
 
Transport: 
Chrysopid eggs should be packed in plastic jars 
with Corcyra eggs, paper strips should be provided 
to minimize contact and cannibalism between 
chrysopid larvae in case larvae emerge during 
transit. 
 
Field release: 
Normally, chrysopids are recommended for use 
against different crop pests @ 50,000 or 1,00,000 
1st instar la rvae/hectare, 4 -6 larvae/plant or 10 -20 
larvae/fruit plant are released. Depending on the 
situation, two releases are recommended. They are 
released on the plants along with saw dust, or 
dropped from the corrugated paper strips. 
Dose:  
Crop/Pest Species/ N umbers 
released 
Cotton 
Old world bollworm 
Helicoverpa 
(=Heliothis) armigera  
Spotted/spiny boll 
worms Earias spp.  
Pink bollworm 
Pecticophora 
gossypiella  
Whitefly Bemista tabaci  
Aphid Aphis gossypii 
 
Mallada boninensis or 
Chrysoperla carnea  @ 
50,000/ha twice during 
the season with a gap of 
15 days. 
Tobacco 
Aphid Myzus persicae 
Tobacco caterpillar  
Spodoptera litura 
Whitefly Bemisia tabaci 
Chrysoperla carnea / 
Apertochrysa 
crassinervis @ 50,000/ 
ha or 6 larvae per plant 
twice during the season 
with an int erval of 15 
days. 
Sunflower 
Head borer  Helicoverpa 
armigera 
Chrysoperla carnea @ 
50,000/ ha 1 st instar 
larvae twice during the 
Aphid Aphis sp. season with an interval 
of 15 days. 
Groundnut 
Aphid Aphis craccivora 
Chrysoperla carnea @ 
50,000/ ha 1 st instar 
larvae twice during the 
season with an interval 
of 15 days 
Fruit crops 
Aphids 
Other soft bodied insects 
Chrysoperla carnea or 
Mallada boninensis @ 
10-20 larvae per 
infested tree depending 
on the pest population. 
 
Maintenance of history sheet: 
The following information is furnished: 
1. Date of egg collection. 
2. Date of hatching. 
3. Date of pupation. 
4. Expected date of adult emergence. 
5. Date of collection of adults. 
6. Problems encountered with the culture 
during production. 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
Biology of Host (Corcyra cephalonica): 
The eggs are oval and measure 0.5 x 0.3 mm.  
The white surface is sculptured and has a short 
nipple-like process at one end.  The larvae are 
generally creamish – white except for the head 
capsule and the prothoracic tergite, w hich are 
brown. There are well -developed prolegs on 
abdominal segments 3 -6 and 10. A fully matured 
larva measures 15 mm. The last-instar larva spins a 
closely woven, very tough, double -layered cocoon 
in which it develops into a dark -brown pupa.  The 
anterior portion of the cocoon has a line of 
weakness through which the adult emerges.  The 
adults are small.  The hind-wings are pale -buff, and 
the fore -wings are mid -brown or greyish -brown 
with thin vague lines of darker brown colour along 

CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
129 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
the wing veins. The mal es are smaller than the 
females. 
Sexual activity usually begins shortly after adult 
emergence. There is a pre -oviposition period of 
about 2 days.  Egg-laying mainly occurs during the 
night. The greatest numbers are laid on the second 
and third days after em ergence, although 
oviposition may continue throughout life. Eggs take 
about 2 -3 days to hatch.  Optimum conditions for 
larval development of  C. cephalonica  are 30 – 
32.50C and 70 per cent RH, at which, the period 
from egg hatch to adult emergence is only 26 -27 
days. There is considerable variation in the number 
of larval instars; however, males generally have 7 
and females have 8.  The last -instar larvae pupate 
within the food.  The adults emerge through the 
anterior end of the cocoon, where there is a line of  
weakness. The sex ratio is 1:1.  The adult moth is 
nocturnal and is most active at nightfall. 
 
 
Host production:  
Material required: 
Absorbent cotton  Storage racks 
Blotting paper Streptomycin sulphate 
Broken Pearl millet grain Rubber band 
Camel hair brush Measuring cylinder 
Enamel Tray Oven 
Honey Home milling machine 
Markin cloth Sieves 
Mosquito net Formaldehyde 40% 
Moth aspirator 
(collector) 
Filter paper 
Oviposition drums Moth scale egg separator 
Plastic basin Face masks 
Shoe brush Storing drums 
Soap Ground nut kernel 
Specimen tube Sulphur (WP) 
Yeast Coarse weighing balance 
  
Procedure: 
Preparation of rearing basins 
The basins (16” dia) used 
for Corcyra multiplication are thoroughly cleaned 
with 0.5% detergent wash and rinsing in tap water 
followed by wiping with dry, clean – used towel 
and shade drying. Whenever the trays are emptied 
after a cycle of rearing, they have to be cleaned 
preferably to 2 per cent formaldehyde and returned 
to storage until further use. On reuse the cleaning 
steps are repeated. 
 
Preparation of bajra medium for Corcyra 
a) The required quantities of bajra grains are 
coarsely milled and broken into 2 -3 pieces in a 
milling machine. The broken grains are heat 
sterilized at 100 0C for 1 hour to eliminate the 
residual population of stored product insects viz., 
Rhizopertha dominica , Sitotroga 
cerealella, Tribolium castaneum  and fungal 
contaminants. Upon sterilization the grains are 
cooled under fan in a clean area.  The grains are 
then transferred to plastic basins @ 2.5 kg/basin. 
b) Groundnut kernel in required quantity is broken 
using a pounding machine or a mechanical 
blender (domestic mixer). Then 100 g of the 
broken kernel is transferred to each basin and 
the contents are hand mixed thoroughly. 
c) Dry yeast (Bakers) and wettable sul fur is added 
@ 5g/ basin and the contents are mixed 
thoroughly. A spray of 10 ml of 0.01 -0.05% 
streptomycin sulfate and mixing of the contents 
follows this.  This medium is used for 
rearing Corcyra larvae. 
d) The number of basins required for egg 
infestation i s calculated and the medium is 
prepared accordingly. 
 
Preparation of Corcyra eggs 
The primary source of  Corcyra eggs is reputed 
laboratories, commercial producers for bulk 
preparation. If it is intended to begin the production 
with nucleus colony, the adul t moths can be 
collected from warehouses where the food materials 
are stored. 
 The eggs used for building up the colony 
of Corcyra have to be free from contaminants 
like the moth scales and broken limbs and not 
exposed to UV light. 
 The collections of overnight laid eggs are 
measured volumetrically to ascertain the number 
of trays that can be infested with eggs. A cc of 
eggs is known to contain approximately 16000 – 
18000 eggs. 
 
Infestation of medium with eggs 
The overall production scheme involves initial 
infestation of the Pearl millet medium with Corcyra 
eggs in desired quantities.  This is accomplished by 
sprinkling the freely flowing eggs on the surface of 
the medium in individual basins. Per basin 0.5 cc 
eggs of  Corcyra is infested. The basins are then 
covered with clean  markin cloth and held tightly 
with rubber fasteners. The basins are carefully 
transferred to the racks. 
 
Handling the trays during larval development 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
130 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
The larvae that hatch out in 3 -4 days begin to 
feed the fortified Bajra medium. At this s tage, light 
webbings are noticed on the surface. As the larvae 
grow up they move down.  During this period the 
larvae are allowed to grow undisturbed in the trays. 
 
Handling of adults 
The adults begin to emerge in 28 -30 days after 
infestation of the eggs. T he adults can be seen on 
the inner side of the markin cloth. They are either 
aspirated with mechanical moth collector or 
collected with specimen tubes. The whole operation 
is carried out in a tent of mosquito net.  This 
prevents the large-scale escape of th e moths, which 
if uncontrolled can migrate to the storage area and 
spoil the grains stored by laying eggs.  Workers 
involved in the collection of moths should wear 
face moths continuously to avoid inhalation of 
scales. The moths collected are transferred to  the 
oviposition drum @ 1000 pairs per drum at a time.  
The oviposition drums of size 30 x 20 cm are made 
of galvanized iron. The drums rest on tripod frames 
with legs of height 5cm.  The bottoms of the drums 
are provided with wire meshes that enable 
collection of eggs. The walls of the drums have two 
vents (ventilation holes) opposed to each other. The 
vents are again covered with wire mesh. The lids of 
the drums have handles besides slots for 
introducing the moths and adult feed.  The 
oviposition drums filled in a day are maintained for 
four to seven successive days for egg collection 
after which are emptied and cleaned for next cycle 
of use.  
The adults are provided feed containing honey 
solution. The adult feed is prepared by mixing 50 
ml honey with 50 ml w ater and 5 capsules of 
vitamin E (Evion). The feed is stored in refrigerator 
and used as and when required.  Piece of cotton 
wool tied with a thread is soaked in the solution and 
inserted into the drum through the slot at the top.  
From a basin, moths can be  collected upto 90 days 
after which the number of moths emerging 
dwindles down and keeping the basins is not 
economical for the producer. 
 
Handling of eggs 
The moths lay the eggs in large numbers 
loosely. The scales and broken limbs are also found 
in larger quantities along with the eggs.  They cause 
potential hazard to the workers after years of 
working in  Corcyra laboratory. To minimize the 
risk of scales freely floating in the air, the 
oviposition drums are placed on sheets of filter 
paper in enamel trays  which trap effectively the 
scales. Sets of several oviposition drums are kept in 
ventilated place near an exhaust fan to enable the 
workers comfort.  Daily morning the oviposition 
drums are lifted up and the wire -mesh bottoms are 
cleaned gently with a shoe  brush so that the eggs 
and remnants of scales and limbs settled on the 
mesh are collected along with those on the filter 
paper. The collections are cleaned by gently rolling 
the eggs on filter paper to another container.  Then 
they are passed to sieves in series and finally clean 
eggs are collected.  The eggs are quantified in 
measuring cylinders and used for building up the 
stocks and natural enemy production.  
About 100 pairs of adults produce 1.5 cc of eggs in 
4 days laying period inside the oviposition dr ums. 
From each basin an average of 2500 moths are 
collected. Hence from each basin 18.00 – 20.00 cc 
of eggs can be obtained in 90 days. 
 
Precaution: 
Bacterial diseasemay affect the Corcyra culture. 
To control this, Streptomycin sulphate is added to 
the cru shed graind at the rate of 0.2 gm/kg and 
mixed thoroughly. Occationally the mite Pyemotes 
ventricosus (Newport) may contaminate the culture 
and affect egg -laying and larval development. If 
mites are observed, thye racks, cages, boxes etc. 
should be disinfe cted with formalin and placed in 
the sun for six hours. Boxes containing developing 
larvae should be dusted with sulphur so that a thin 
layer of sulphur is present over the grains. If 
infestation is severe, it may be necessary to treat 
with the acaricide d icofol (Kelthane). For this, 
muslin sheets are dipped in a 0.05% solution of 
dicifol and air dried for a couple of hours. These 
sheets are spread over the grains in boxes. Mites 
coming in contact with the treated cloth are killed 
rapidly. Bracon hebetor  Say must be kept away 
from infesting the culture of C. cephalonica. 
 
Maintenance of quality:  Accurate information is 
needed on the history of individual basins.  
 
Maintenance of history sheet: 
The following information is furnished. 
1. Date of egg infestation 
2. Date of preparation of feed 
3. Source of egg 
4. Expected date of adult emergence 
5. Daily collection of moths 
6. Problems encountered with the basin during 
production 
 
Reference: 
Leppla, N.C, Bloem, K. A. and Luck, R.F.2002. 
Quality control for mass -reared arthropods. 
CBG-IPM: Laboratory Manual 
131 
Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Pest Management 
Proceedings of the Eighth and Ninth Workshops 
of the IOBC Working Group on Quality Control 
of Mass-Reared Arthropods.pp 171. 
National repository of natural enemies of crop pests 
and weeds. Final technical report (01-04-1997 to 
31-03-2000). Project Director ate of Biological 
Control (Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research) Hebbal, Bellary road, Bangalore - 560 
024. 
Sahayaraj,K. 2004. Indian insect predators in 
biological control. Daya pullishing house. 
1123/74. Devaram Park, Tri Nagar, Delhi -
110035. 
Sattar, M and Abro, G. H. 2011. Mass Rearing of 
Chrysoperla carnea  (Stephens) (Neuroptera: 
Chrysopidae) Adults for Integrated Pest 
Management Programmes . Pakistan J. Zool., 
43(3): 483-487. 
Singh, S.P.1995. Technology for Production of 
Natural Enemies. Project Direc torate of 
Biological Control., Post Bag No. 2491. H.A. 
Farm Post, Bangalore-560024 (India). 
http://www.nbaii.res.in 
http://www.tnau.ac.in/ 
